Title: Dynamic Prediction of the Target Survival Time in Metastatic Solid Tumor Cancer Clinical Trials

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.20625v1

Published Time: Thu, 23 Apr 2026 01:13:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 35

Markdown Content:
DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF THE TARGET SURVIVAL TIME IN METASTATIC SOLID TUMOR CANCER CLINICAL TRIALS 

BY SIDI WANG 1,a , K ELLEY KIDWELL 1,b ,BO HUANG 2,c AND SATRAJIT ROYCHOUDHURY 2,d     

> 1University of Michigan, Department of Biostatistics , asidiwang@umich.edu; bkidwell@umich.edu
> 2Pfizer Inc., cBo.Huang@pfizer.com; dSatrajit.Roychoudhury@pfizer.com

Overall survival (OS) is the gold standard for assessing patient bene-fit and cost-effectiveness of new cancer drugs. However, it is often diffi-cult to use OS as the primary endpoint in randomized clinical trials (RCTs) for patients with metastatic cancer due to multiple reasons. In recent years, progression-free survival (PFS) has increasingly been used as the primary endpoint in metastatic cancer RCTs to accelerate development. However, reg-ulatory authorities often seek mature OS data for approval. Therefore, it is critical to determine the target time when OS data are expected to be ma-ture for reliable statistical inference. Motivated by an advanced renal cell car-cinoma (RCC) clinical trial, we develop and investigate different prediction models leveraging information from disease progression to improve target OS prediction times. We propose a multivariate joint modeling approach consid-ering components of progression and OS and extend three models commonly used for association to be used for OS prediction. To the best of our knowl-edge, this is the first comprehensive statistical study exploring the prediction of OS using different levels of information on disease progression and illus-trating these models using a real, complex dataset. Our findings have signifi-cant implications for OS prediction. 

1. Introduction. In recent years, many cancer drugs have received regulatory approvals based on results from phase 3 randomized clinical trials (RCTs) with progression-free sur-vival (PFS) as the primary endpoint. Though PFS is well accepted as an intermediate end-point for many cancer types, improvement in overall survival (OS) remains the clinical gold standard for assessing patient benefit (Tang et al., 2007; Driscoll and Rixe, 2009; Methy, Be-denne and Bonnetain, 2010; Grigore et al., 2020) and cost-effectiveness (Royle et al., 2023) of a new drug. Planning a statistically well-powered OS analysis in practice is often chal-lenging due to patients switching to alternative treatments after progression, non-response to treatment, starting other anti-cancer therapies, or being lost to follow-up. The timing of the RCT primary analysis with PFS as the endpoint is primarily driven by the number of patients who progressed. Therefore, at the time of the primary analysis, OS data are often not mature enough for meaningful statistical inference regarding treatment effects due to a low number of deaths. If PFS is statistically significant in the final analysis, regulatory agencies often re-quest one or more updated OS analyses once the survival data are more mature. Thus, proper planning is necessary to understand when mature OS data will be available. Model-based prediction of OS time for trial participants helps research teams allocate resources efficiently, plan future OS analyses accurately, and assess the likelihood of demon-strating the survival benefit of an experimental drug in the analysis. Accurate OS predictions not only facilitate the effective use of limited healthcare resources but also may benefit the patient in allowing the patient, their clinician, and family to make suitable plans for the re-mainder of the patient’s life (Mackillop and Quirt, 1997). Sborov et al. (2019) demonstrated 

Keywords and phrases: Bayesian statistics, Multivariate joint modeling, Overall survival, Progression-free sur-vival, Survival analysis. 

1

> arXiv:2604.20625v1 [stat.ME] 22 Apr 2026 2

that when oncologists inaccurately predict OS, patients with advanced cancer are more likely to receive aggressive end-of-life care, which often contradicts the patients’ wishes. Beyond drug approval and patient benefit, accurate OS predictions play a key role in deter-mining the cost-effectiveness of a new drug and whether it is recommended for use in stan-dard of care and reimbursement. Cost-effectiveness evaluations of new cancer treatments in health technology assessments rely on model-based extrapolation (Dias et al., 2011; Latimer, 2011). Various national health authorities, including the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advisory Committee, and the Cana-dian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health, provide guidance on appropriate extrapo-lation techniques for individual trials using parametric and semi-parametric distributions (for Drugs et al., 2006; Latimer, 2011; Committee et al., 2016). Heeg et al. (2022) have discussed a pragmatic two-step approach to select the optimal model and its corresponding distribution to ensure that the most plausible settings are being used for health technology assessment submissions. Henderson, Jones and Stare (2001) further provide examples of how accurate survival predictions have financial implications for insurance programs and health authori-ties. However, none of these approaches explored the relationship between progression and death to improve prediction accuracy. When PFS is used as the primary endpoint, it captures the process of progression across target, non-target, and new lesions and death. That is, PFS is a composite endpoint defined as the time from randomization until progressive disease (PD) or death from any cause. In solid tumor studies, PD is evaluated using the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (Eisenhauer et al., 2009), commonly referred to as RECIST. The following four components comprise PFS: 1) measurement of the target lesion, which is captured as longitudinal contin-uous data; 2) time to worsening of the non-target lesion; 3) time to the emergence of a new lesion; and 4) time to death from any cause. Depending on the cancer type, each of these components has a different predictive degree of OS. For example, Stein et al. (2013) showed that in Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma (RCC) the worsening of a non-target lesion or the appearance of a new lesion are more predictive of OS benefit than the sum of the longest tumor diameter of the target lesion. The current practice of OS prediction often ignores the disease progression process and models only the number of deaths. In this manuscript, we develop and evaluate several model-based approaches to forecast the survival (death) times of trial participants “still alive" leveraging information about dis-ease progression and important baseline factors. Quantifying the relationship between disease progression and survival has garnered interest in both statistical and clinical literature over time. Among some of the notable ones, Fleischer, Gaschler-Markefski and Bluhmki (2009) employed exponential time-to-event distributions to describe the dependency structure be-tween OS and PFS. This is further expanded by Fu et al. (2013); Weber and Titman (2019) and Meller, Beyersmann and Rufibach (2019) by utilizing copula and multi-state models to jointly analyze PFS and OS without a strict parametric assumption for the marginal sur-vival distributions of PFS and OS. Shukuya et al. (2016) investigated the correlation between median PFS and median OS, concluding that both tumor response and PFS are significant predictors of OS. Other methodologies for OS prediction include joint modeling of the lon-gitudinal tumor size data of target tumor and survival data (Claret et al. (2009, 2013); Wang et al. (2009); Bruno, Mercier and Claret (2014); Zecchin et al. (2016), and Lim et al. (2019)). Meanwhile, Yu, Wang and Kågedal (2020) jointly modeled the dynamics of target lesions and the progression of non-target lesions to predict PFS. However, most of the literature in this area is primarily focused on improving the estimation of OS rather than predicting the future survival time of patients who are ongoing in the trial. To our current knowledge, there is no existing method that formally combines all three components of disease progression along with additional uncertainties associated with death DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 3

Fig 1: Evolution of progression and death data during trial while predicting survival. We propose a multivariate joint modeling approach in this paper to fill that gap. Further, popular methods to analyze PFS and OS jointly, like the shared param-eter joint model, copula and multi-state model methods, have not previously been developed and illustrated for OS prediction. Hence, we extend the shared parameter joint model, copula and multi-state models used primarily for association to be used for OS prediction. We com-pare OS predictions across these three novel methods and to a traditional marginal Weibull baseline hazard model of OS. 

2. Motivating Example: Phase 3 Study in Renal Cell Carcinoma. The methods out-lined in this paper are inspired by a phase 3, randomized, open-label, parallel-arm clinical trial (Motzer et al., 2019). Treatment-naive adult participants with advanced RCC were ran-domized (1:1) to receive either the experimental drug or the active comparator, which was the standard of care. A key inclusion criterion was the presence of at least one measurable le-sion, as defined by RECIST version 1.1. Tumor assessments were performed using computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging at baseline, every six weeks post-randomization for the first 18 months, and subsequently every 12 weeks until confirmed disease progression. Important baseline demographic and disease characteristics were evenly distributed between the two treatment groups. The study had two primary endpoints: PFS and OS. The primary analysis was scheduled when at least 397 PFS events occurred (Figure 1). At the time of the primary PFS analysis, only 146 deaths were observed, which was immature to draw any reasonable conclusion about the OS benefit provided by the new drug. Therefore, an updated analysis of OS was planned after 341 deaths in the trial. The trial findings indicated that pa-tients administered the experimental drug experienced a markedly extended PFS compared to those given the active comparator. It is crucial to note that while we have utilized the data structure from a real-life trial, the actual values presented here are simulated based on pub-lished summary statistics, both for proprietary considerations and to ensure proper protection of patient data. We aim to use the observed data to construct a predictive tool that reliably estimates the time of the nth death in the trial. In addition to timing, we are also interested in calculating the likelihood of demonstrating survival benefits in the updated OS analysis. This informa-tion is strategically and ethically important for retaining patients on the experimental drug. Specifically, we employ data on participants’ baseline characteristics, treatment group, cur-rent survival status, and the details of tumor progression, i.e., target lesion measurements and 4

the progression of disease of non-target and new lesions. We develop models in the setting of RCC since PFS is known to be a good predictor of OS (Heng et al., 2011), but the proposed model could be applied to other similar metastatic cancer settings. Supplementary Figure 1 shows significant variability between individuals for the sum of the longest diameters of target lesions. Therefore, it is difficult to draw any conclusions about treatment without systematically modeling the variability. The Kaplan-Meier plots of non-target lesions and new lesions are shown in Supplementary Figure 2b and 2c. We observe a difference between the two treatment arms from both plots: patients who received the ex-perimental drug had a longer time to PD considering non-target lesion and new lesion as-sessments. A similar trend is also observed in the Kaplan-Meier plots of OS (Supplementary Figure 2d) and PFS (Supplementary Figure 2e). 

3. Statistical Models for Milestone Prediction of Survival Endpoints. We present four different methods (Sections 3.1, 3.2, 3.3.1, and 3.3.2) for predicting milestone survival times based on disease progression information. These models use the components of tumor progression in different formats (e.g., as each component separately or as a composite end-point) along with the available death data to predict the time of death for ongoing patients. To understand the efficiency gain from progression data, we have included a parametric model (Section 3.4) that uses death information marginally, ignoring progression status. 3.1. Prediction Model Based on Jointly Modeling Different Components of Disease Pro-gression. We start with a new multivariate joint modeling approach (baveJM) that models the association between each component of disease progression and survival. Three separate models considering the association between survival and i) the sum of the longest diameter of target lesions, ii) the time to non-target lesion PD, and iii) the time to new lesion PD are proposed to explain the underlying heterogeneity of tumor progression dynamics and pre-vent information loss. In addition, we include a marginal model of current OS to take into account other intercurrent events (e.g., cross-over of control patient to treatment arm after progression) that can potentially affect the long-term survival of patients. The proposed baveJM provides real-time OS predictions from each trial participant “still alive" in two steps. First, we derive four sets of intermediate predictions based on the four models by fully encapsulating the association between progression and death. In the second step, we consolidate the OS predictions from all four models simultaneously using Bayesian model averaging (BMA) (Hoeting et al., 1999). The structure of baveJM is illustrated in Figure 2. 3.1.1. Joint Model 1: the Association between Target Lesion and OS. A shared parame-ter model is used to explore the association between target lesion measurements and OS. We consider a set of n subjects followed over an interval of time [0, τ ]. Let zij be the target lesion measurement (or % change from baseline in the sum of the longest diameter of target lesions) at time tij (for the i-th participant at the j-th visit) where i = 1 , ..., n and j = 1 , ..., k i. We assume the target lesion measurement time tij is non-informative so that it is independent of the longitudinal measurement and event-time processes for OS. This is a reasonable assump-tion as the tumor assessment timings were often specified in the protocol before study starts. We define a latent zero-mean Gaussian process Wi(t) for the i-th participant, independent of different participants. The following sub-models link the joint model of lesion measurements and OS: 

Yi(t) ∼ N (μi(t), σ 2 

> ϵ

),DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 5Joint Model 1:    

> Target Lesion
> Sum of LD and OS
> Joint Model 3:
> Time to New Lesion
> PD and OS
> OS Prediction 2 OS Prediction 3
> Final OS Prediction by Bayesian Model Average
> Joint Model 2:
> Time to Non -target
> Lesion PD and OS
> OS Prediction 1
> 𝑤 !𝑤 "
> 𝑤 #
> Model 4:
> Marginal mode lof
> overall survival
> OS Prediction 4
> 𝑤 $

Fig 2: Multivariate joint modeling structure. where Yi(t) and σϵ are the target lesion measurement for subject i at time t and variability associated with it. Moreover, the lesion measurement process μ(t) is modeled by the linear model 

μi(t) = Xi(t)′βμ + Wi(t),Wi(t) = b1i + b2it. 

Here, Xi(t) refers to a time-dependent covariate matrix for subject i’s lesion measurement. Finally, Wi(t) is a Gaussian process with ( b1i, b 2i) being zero-mean bivariate Gaussian vari-ables with variances σ21 and σ22 respectively, and correlation coefficient ρ.The OS process at time t is modeled by a Weibull model: 

λ(t) = λ0(t) exp( Z′

> i

βOS + λμ i(t)) = αOS ,TL γOS tαOS ,TL −1 exp( Z′

> i

βOS + λμ i(t)) ,

where Zi is a covariate matrix for OS, γOS and αOS ,TL are the scale and shape parameters of the Weibull distribution. 3.1.2. Joint Models 2 and 3: the Association Between OS and Time to Worsening of Non-Target Lesion or Time to Appearance of New Lesion. Based on RECIST 1.1, the detailed tumor measurements of non-target and new lesions are not available at each visit. For exam-ple, we only know the current status of the non-target lesion (stable/worsen/disappear) and the appearance of a new lesion (yes/no). Moreover, this information is only available until the date of progression. Therefore, we use the time to worsening of non-target lesion (or time to appearance of new lesion) for the prediction model. The association between time to wors-ening of non-target lesion or time to appearance of new lesion and OS are explored using separate bivariate distributions. We used a copula-based model to capture the dependence between these survival times. Copulas are commonly used for modeling the dependence be-tween random variables. They are continuous multivariate cumulative distributions with each random variable following a uniform marginal distribution on the interval [0 , 1] . Sklar’s the-orem states that any multivariate joint distribution can be written using univariate marginal distribution functions and a copula describing the variables’ dependence structure (Sklar, 1959). 6

We propose a Clayton copula function (Clayton, 1978) to model dependencies between time to worsening of non-target lesion (or time to appearance of the new lesion) and OS. The proposed class of Archimedean copula can capture strong dependence in the left tail. The relationship between time to worsening of non-target lesion (NT) (or time to appearance of new lesion (NL)) and OS is captured by a single parameter ηN T (or ηN L ), a parameter that can be directly linked to Kendall’s tau, effectively characterizing their dependence. In the subsequent paragraphs, we formally define the copula model between time to worsening of non-target lesion (or time to appearance of new lesion) and OS. The model can be specified as 

S1(tNT , t OS |Z) = {SNT (tNT |Z)−ηNT + SOS (tOS |Z)−ηNT − 1}−1/η NT ,S2(tNL , t OS |Z) = {SNL (tNL |Z)−ηNL + SOS (tOS |Z)−ηNL − 1}−1/η NL .

Here tN T , tN L , and tOS denote times to worsening of non-target lesion, time to appearance of new lesion, and time to death (OS), respectively. Z denotes the set of potential disease modifiers or baseline covariates for the prediction model. ηNT , η NL > 0 measures the corre-lation between time to worsening of non-target lesion or time to appearance of new lesion and OS. A large value of ηNT or ηNL represents a high correlation. When ηNT or ηNL goes to 0, the correlation approaches 0, and when ηNT or ηNL goes to ∞, the correlation converges to 1. Moreover, marginal survival probabilities are calculated using proportional hazard models expressed as: 

SA(tiA |Zi) = exp( −

Z t

> 0

λA(tiA |Zi)) , A= NT, NL, OS; i = 1 , ..., n, λA(tiA |Zi) = λ0,A(tiA )exp( Zi′βA),λ0,A(tiA ) = γiA tαA 

> A

exp( Zi′βA),γiA = γA + biA .

Here, we introduce random effects for the scale parameter of the Weibull model ( biA ) to take into account the additional heterogeneity in the patient population. Note that the censoring mechanism is associated with the time to worsening of non-target lesions, time to appearance of new lesions, and OS. The details of the likelihood construction under each joint model and implementation are provided in supplemental materials. 3.1.3. Model 4: Marginal Model for OS. Finally, we introduce a marginal OS model to account for the risk of death not explained by disease progression. This includes scenarios when patients die without any evidence of disease progression or a change in risk of death due to exposure to other anti-cancer treatments after progression. A Weibull regression model similar to the marginal OS models mentioned in previous sections is used in this context. 3.1.4. Prediction: Posterior Predictive Distribution (PPD). For each of the models in Sections 3.1.1 - 3.1.3, we utilize the PPD technique (Gelman et al., 2014) to generate OS predictions. The PPD represents the distribution of potential unobserved values based on the observed values, and it follows this structure: 

p(ypred |y) = 

Z

p(ypred , θ |y)dθ =

Z

p(ypred |θ, y )p(θ|y)dθ =

Z

p(ypred |θ)p(θ|y)dθ. 

This formulation leverages the conditional independence between y (observed data), ypred 

(unobserved data), and θ (parameters). The PPD can be understood as an average of condi-tional predictions over the posterior distribution of θ. During the MCMC process, for each sampled θ from the posterior distribution, a corresponding ypred sample is obtained. DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 7

To produce PPD samples for OS using the models presented in the previous sections, we used JAGS software (Plummer, 2017) along with the rjags package for implementation in the R environment. 3.1.5. Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA). We propose a Bayesian Model Averaging (BMA) method to combine OS predictions from the four models described in Sections 3.1.1 - 3.1.3. In prognostic modeling, it is standard to generate predictions by selecting a single model based on certain metrics. In the context of oncology, different PFS components may be more correlated with OS under various tumor types or patient groups, thus offering more accurate OS predictions. Here, we use BMA to calculate the weighted average of the pre-dicted OS under the three joint models and one marginal model for the OS defined above. The weights indicate the plausibility of each model being the most predictive model. We de-note the models defined in Sections 3.1.1, 3.1.2, and 3.1.3 by MT , MN T , MN L , and MOS ,respectively. Then by BMA, the final predicted probability of OS follows 

P (Ypred |Data ) = P (Ypred.t |MT , Data )P (MT |Data )+ P (Ypred.nt |MN T , Data )P (MN T |Data )+ P (Ypred.nl |MN L , Data )P (MN L |Data )+ P (Ypred.os |MOS , Data )P (MOS |Data ),

where P (MT |Data ), P (MN T |Data ), P (MN L |Data ), and P (MOS |Data ) are model weights. In general, if we have a total of Q models, the model weight for model q at the 

tth MCMC iteration is 

w(t) 

> q

= P (Mq|Data, θ (t)) = P (Mq, Data, θ (t))

P (Data, θ (t)) = P (Data |Mq, θ (t))P (θ(t)|Mq)P (Mq)

P (Data, θ (t)) ,

where θ(t) = ( θ(t)1 , θ (t)2 , ..., θ (t) 

> Q

). If we set P (θh|Mh, Data ) = gh, and q̸ = h, then according to Congdon (2007), 

P (θ(t)|Mq) = P (θ(t) 

> q

|Mq)

> Q

Y

> h=1 ,h ̸=q

P (θ(t) 

> h

|Mq) = P (θ(t) 

> q

|Mq)

> Q

Y

> h=1 ,h ̸=q

gh.

Therefore, 

w(t) 

> q

= P (Mq|Data, θ (t))= P (Data |Mq, θ (t) 

> q

)P (θ(t) 

> q

|Mq) QQh=1 ,h ̸=q ghP (Mq)

PQk=1 P (Mk, Data, θ (t))= P (Data |Mq, θ (t))P (θ(t) 

> q

|Mq) QQh=1 ,h ̸=q ghP (Mq)

PQk=1 P (Data |Mk, θ (t))P (θ(t) 

> k

|Mk) QKh=1 ,h ̸=k ghP (Mk) .

Through the above formulae, we implement the BMA approach and calculate the final pre-dicted OS. 3.2. Prediction Models Based on Using Shared Parameter to jointly model all Compo-nents of Disease Progression. We implement the shared parameter random effect joint model (SPJM) model in a single Bayesian hierarchy (Vonesh, Greene and Schluchter, 2006; Lawrence Gould et al., 2015; Ratcliffe, Guo and Ten Have, 2004), linking the longitudinal target lesion measurements, the two progression components (time to worsening of non-target 8

lesion and time to appearance of new lesion), and OS through shared subject–level random effects. For participant i = 1 , . . . , n observed at visits j = 1 , . . . , k i at times tij , the target lesion measurement ˜Yij is modeled as 

˜Yij | ˜b1i, ˜b2i, ˜β0, ˜σ2 

> Y

∼ N ˜μij , ˜σ2

> Y

, ˜μij = ˜X⊤ 

> i

˜β0 + tij 

  ˜β0,t + ˜b2i

 + ˜b1i,

where ˜Xi collects covariates for the lesion process, ˜β0 are fixed effects, and ˜β0,t is a fixed time slope. We introduce four subject–specific latent terms: a correlated intercept–slope pair 

(˜b1i, ˜b2i) with correlation ˜ρ, and two additional Gaussian frailties ˜b3i and ˜b4i,

˜b1i

˜b2i

!

∼ N

 00



,

 ˜σ2 

> b1

˜ρ ˜σb1 ˜σb2

˜ρ ˜σb1 ˜σb2 ˜σ2

> b2

 

, ˜b3i ∼ N 0, ˜σ2

> b3

, ˜b4i ∼ N 0, ˜σ2

> b4

,

with ˜b3i ⊥ (˜b1i, ˜b2i) and ˜b4i ⊥ (˜b1i, ˜b2i, ˜b3i). The two progression components are fit with Weibull regressions, with the scale modeled log–linearly using the shared effects. For the time to worsening of non–target lesion (NT), ˜TNT ,i ,

˜TNT ,i | ˜αNT , ˜θNT ,i ∼ Weibull  ˜αNT , ˜θNT ,i 

,

log ˜θNT ,i = ˜Z⊤ 

> NT ,i

˜βNT + ˜ϕ1˜b1i + ˜ϕ2˜b2i + ˜b3i,

so that ˜hNT ,i (t) = ˜ αNT ˜θNT ,i t˜αNT −1. Here ˜b1i and ˜b2i are incorporated via association pa-rameters ( ˜ϕ1, ˜ϕ2), while ˜b3i acts as an NT–specific frailty. For the time to appearance of new lesion (NL), ˜TNL ,i ,

˜TNL ,i | ˜αNL , ˜θNL ,i ∼ Weibull  ˜αNL , ˜θNL ,i 

,

log ˜θNL ,i = ˜Z⊤ 

> NL ,i

˜βNL + ˜ϕ3˜b1i + ˜ϕ4˜b2i + ˜b4i,

yielding ˜hNL ,i (t) = ˜ αNL ˜θNL ,i t˜αNL −1. The association ( ˜ϕ3, ˜ϕ4) maps the latent lesion process to NL risk, and ˜b4i serves as the NL–specific frailty. Overall survival ˜TOS ,i depends on all four latent terms: 

˜TOS ,i | ˜αOS , ˜θOS ,i ∼ Weibull  ˜αOS , ˜θOS ,i 

,

log ˜θOS ,i = ˜Z⊤ 

> OS ,i

˜βOS + ˜ϕ5˜b1i + ˜ϕ6˜b2i + ˜ϕ7˜b3i + ˜ϕ8˜b4i,

so that ˜hOS ,i (t) = ˜ αOS ˜θOS ,i t˜αOS −1. The coefficients ( ˜ϕ5, ˜ϕ6, ˜ϕ7, ˜ϕ8) quantify how the latent lesion level, its slope, and the two progression–component frailties translate to death risk. For OS prediction, we generate posterior predictive OS draws for each participant who is “still alive”. 3.3. Prediction Models Based on Disease Progression as a Composite Endpoint. 

3.3.1. Copula Models for TTP and OS. Modeling TTP is similar to modeling PFS, but TTP excludes deaths from any cause. If a patient dies without documented disease progres-sion, their TTP is censored at the last follow-up. Similar to the model defined in 3.1.2, we use λTTP (t|Z) to denote the hazard function for TTP. Under the Cox proportional hazards model, we have λTTP (t|Z) = λ0,TTP (t)exp( Z′βTTP ), and the corresponding survival func-tion is given by STTP (t|Z) = exp {− γTTP tαTTP exp( Z′βTTP )}, such that γTTP and αTTP 

are the scale and shape parameters of the Weibull distribution, respectively. The Clayton model between TTP and OS is specified as 

S1(tTTP , t OS |Z) = {STTP (tTTP |Z)−ηTTP + SOS (tOS |Z)−ηTTP − 1}−1/η TTP ,

where ηTTP > 0 measures the correlation. Figure 3 illustrates the Clayton copula fitted be-tween TTP and OS. The likelihood derivation can be found in supplementary materials. OS predictions are obtained using the PPD method described in Section 3.1.4. DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 9

3.3.2. Multi-State Model. A multi-state model is another common approach for model-ing the event history of participants in clinical trials (Andersen and Keiding, 2002; Meira-Machado et al., 2009; Putter, Fiocco and Geskus, 2007), but currently, no literature has cov-ered survival time prediction based on a multi-state model. Among the various multi-state models, the one that finds the widest application is the three-state illness-death model, which includes a singular immediate state denoting “illness" (Supplementary Figure 3). In this pa-per, we employ the homogeneous semi-Markov assumption (Cox and Miller, 1977) for the multi-state model, which implies that the hazard of death after progression depends on the time since progression rather than time since randomization. Therefore, for every patient, we examine two distinct periods: the time between randomization and progression, and the du-ration from progression to death. Both of these intervals are treated as separate components and individually modeled. A third scenario occurs when a patient dies without experiencing progression. For the multi-state model, transition probabilities represent the probabilities of transition from one state to another over a given time period. Here, we denote the transition probability as Pkl (t1, t 2) from time t1 to t2, where k, l describes the state with k ∈ 0, 1, 2 and l ∈ 0, 1, 2.The expressions of the transition probabilities are given by (Meira-Machado et al., 2009): 

P00 (t1, t 2) = S0(t2 − t1) = exp (− Y

> 01

(t2 − t1) − Y

> 02

(t2 − t1)) ,P11 (t1, t 2) = S1(t2 − t1) = exp (− Y

> 12

(t2 − t1)) ,P12 (t1, t 2) = S1(t2 − t1) = 

Z t2

> t1

P11 (t1, u )π12 (u; Fu)P22 (u, t 2)du, 

where Q

> kl

(t1, t 2) = R t2 

> t1

πkl (t, Ft)dt is the cumulative transition intensity between states k

and l, where k ≤ l. If we consider the transition intensities πkl (t; Ft) to follow Weibull dis-tributions, they can be expressed as π01 (t) = α (1 /γ 01 )α tα−1, π 02 (t) = α (1 /γ 02 )α tα−1,

and π12 (s) = α (1 /γ 12 )α sα−1, where γ01 , γ 02 and γ03 are the scale parameters, α is the shape parameter, t refers to time since randomization and s refers to time since pro-gression. γ01 , γ 02 and γ03 for each patient are further defined as γ01 ,i = ˜ γ01 exp (β01 Xi),

γ02 ,i = ˜ γ02 exp (β02 Xi), and γ12 ,i = ˜ γ12 exp (β12 Xi), respectively, where i ∈ N , Xi is a vector of covariates, and β01 , β02 and β12 are regression coefficients. ˜γ01 , ˜γ02 , and ˜γ12 are the baseline hazards. To guarantee the convergence of MCMC, a uniform shape parameter α

is employed for all three Weibull functions. The multi-state model’s likelihood construction is provided in supplementary materials. OS predictions are obtained using the PPD method described in Section 3.1.4. 3.4. Marginal Weibull Baseline Hazard Model of OS. Most commonly, PFS is modeled using a Kaplan-Meier curve or Cox regression. For example, a simple Weibull baseline haz-ard model has the form λ(t) = αγt α−1 exp( Z′β), where Zi is the covariate matrix for mod-eling PFS, α and γ are the shape and scale parameters of the Weibull distribution, and β is a vector of coefficients. Note that a standard analytic method does not consider the dynamics of the component processes of PFS and does not take random effects into account. 3.5. Prior Specification. In this section, we provide recommendations for specifying pri-ors for the parameters in the models discussed in Section 3. Our aim is to promote the use of generalizable, weakly informative, or non-informative priors for all model parameters to ensure robust and interpretable results. We emphasize the importance of selecting appropriate priors to maintain parameter identifiability. 10 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 0.0  0.5  1.0  1.5      

> Scatterplot TTP vs OS
> OS TTP
> (a) OS TTP
> 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 0.0  0.4  0.8  1.2
> Contour Plot of TTP vs OS Fitted with a Clayton Copula (b) OS (Weibull Margin) 123TTP (Weibull Margin) 0.5 1.0 Density  0.5 1.0
> Surface Plot of TTP vs OS Fitted with a Clayton Copula (c)

Fig 3: (a) The scatterplot between time to progression (TTP) and overall survival (OS), (b) the contour plot of TTP vs. OS fitted with a Clayton copula, (c) the surface plot of TTP vs. OS fitted with a Clayton copula. 3.5.1. General Guidelines. For the coefficient vectors β and ˜ϕ, we recommend weakly informative normal priors centered at 0. We suggest weakly informative exponential distribu-tions for the shape parameters ( α) in the Weibull distribution. All random effect parameters (b) should follow weakly informative normal distributions, denoted as N (0 , σ 2 

> bk

), where k

stands for different random variables under different models. Weakly informative half-normal priors are recommended for the standard deviations ( σbk ) associated with the random effects. For all Clayton copula parameters ( η), we recommend using weakly informative exponential distributions. These priors can accommodate a wide range of plausible values. In the model assessing the association between target lesion and OS, which is a component of baveJM, we suggest the following priors. For the parameter λ, a weakly informative nor-mal distribution with a mean of 0 is recommended. The correlation coefficient ( ρ) should have a non-informative prior, such as U nif (−1, 1) , to avoid biasing the estimation. Additionally, we assume that all models are equally weighted before fitting BMA, that is, P (Mq) = 1 /Q ,for all q = 1 , ..., Q .In the multi-state model, we advise using weakly informative half-normal priors for all ˜γ

parameters. These priors allow flexibility while constraining extreme values. 

4. Simulations. 

4.1. Design. We performed extensive simulations to evaluate the performance of the pro-posed baveJM approach. All simulated datasets mimic the structure of the RCC trial data. Specifically, we assume a trial with 400 subjects and 25 visits. Longitudinal measurements of target lesion and new lesion status are recorded at each visit. For simplicity purposes, non-target lesion status is not included. Survival status is updated whenever deaths occur. Follow-up visits occur every two months within the first two years, then change to every three months until the end of the fifth year. We censor the subject’s subsequent target lesion measurements and new lesion status whenever that subject dies. We simulate under four scenarios: 1) OS is independent of both target lesion measure-ments and time to appearance of new lesion development; 2) OS is correlated only with time to appearance of new lesion; 3) OS is correlated only with target lesion measurements; and 4) OS is correlated with both target lesion measurements and time to appearance of new lesion development. In all scenarios, both target lesion measurements and new lesion statuses are simulated randomly and independently. However, OS is generated under varying conditions. Specifically, we simulate target lesion measurements using a linear mixed-effects model that incorporates time and treatment as fixed effects, alongside a patient-level random intercept DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 11 10 20 30 40                  

> 100 200 300 350
> Independent OS
> 1
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> OS dependent on NL
> 2
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> OS dependent on TL
> 3
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> model baveJM SPJM Copula Marginal MS
> OS dependent on both NL and TL
> 4
> Bias

(a) 10 20 30 40                   

> 100 200 300 350
> Independent OS
> 1
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> OS dependent on NL
> 2
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> OS dependent on TL
> 3
> 10 20 30 40
> 100 200 300 350
> model baveJM SPJM Copula Marginal MS
> OS dependent on both NL and TL
> 4
> rMSE

(b) 

Fig 4: The bias (a) and root mean squared error (rMSE) (b) of the last (400th) death date predictors of five models: the multivariate joint modeling approach (baveJM), a shared-parameter random-effect joint model (SPJM), a copula model between TTP and OS (Copula), the marginal Weibull baseline hazard model of OS (Marginal), and a multi-state model (MS), under four OS scenarios. The x-axis denotes the number of deaths at the cutoff. The y-axis denotes the number of months. and a random time effect. Furthermore, the time to appearance of new lesion is modeled using a Weibull baseline hazard function. In scenario 1, OS is randomly and independently simulated based on a Weibull baseline hazard function. In scenario 2, OS is conditionally sim-ulated using a bivariate Clayton copula model, linking OS with time to appearance of new lesion. In scenario 3, OS is conditionally simulated based on target lesion measurements. Here, OS is still simulated using a Weibull baseline hazard function, but with an assumed negative correlation between quantiles of OS and larger tumor measurements. In scenario 4, OS is conditionally simulated using both mechanisms: it is linked to time to appearance of a new lesion through a stronger bivariate Clayton copula, and it also depends on the sub-ject’s average target-lesion size (larger averages imply shorter OS). For each scenario, 1000 datasets were generated. To streamline the simulation process, only treatment was included in the covariate matrices. We compare predictions under five models: our proposed baveJM approach, SPJM, a cop-ula model for TTP and OS, a multi-state model, and a marginal Weibull baseline hazard model of OS. To emulate real trial scenarios and assess the prediction performance of our proposed method, we generated snapshots of the data. For each simulated dataset, we took snapshots of what the data would have looked like if only 100, 200, and 300 death events had occurred. Then, we predicted the time of the last (400th) death event under each snapshot dataset. Note 12 

that predictions may be performed at any time during the trial, and 100, 200, and 300 were selected for illustration purposes. Predictions from the five methods were compared. Finally, we calculated each predictor’s coverage rate (CR), root-mean-squared error (rMSE), bias, and width of the 90% credible interval (CI). The 90% CI is the narrowest interval that includes 90% of the posterior distribution of the predictor. All simulations are done in R. The code is provided in the supplementary materials. 4.2. Results. The bias and rMSE of the predicted time of the last death are shown in Figures 4a and 4b, and the corresponding CR and CI width are shown in Supplementary Table 1. The weights of all submodels of baveJM under each simulation scenario are shown in Supplementary Figure 4. Under scenario 1, where OS is generated independently, the bias and rMSE of all predic-tors decrease as more deaths are observed. Overall, the marginal model performs worse than the other four methods. This is because the marginal Weibull uses only OS and, under sub-stantial censoring, tends to anchor predictions near the upper end of the observed follow-up instead of borrowing information from progression components. Given that baveJM placed essentially all its weight on the NL–OS copula model, and the Clayton copula collapses to independence when its dependence parameter is near zero, it is natural that the copula model and baveJM exhibit similar bias and rMSE. SPJM outperforms baveJM and the copula model at 100 deaths but its improvement stalls and its CR declines as more deaths accrue, consis-tent with over-conditioning on shared random effects under a misspecified target lesion and OS link that yields overconfident, too-narrow predictive intervals. Considering all metrics, baveJM and the copula model are the best-performing methods in scenario 1. In Scenario 2, OS and the time to the appearance of a new lesion are generated jointly using a bivariate Clayton copula, so OS depends on NL through the dependence structure. As the number of observed deaths increases, bias and rMSE decrease for all methods. The marginal OS model continues to lag because it ignores progression information, foregoing efficiency and calibration gains available from NL–OS dependence. baveJM and the copula model show very similar bias and rMSE, as baveJM places most of its weight on the NL–OS copula component under this scenario. The multi-state model improves relative to Scenario 1 because it can leverage the presence of NL–OS dependence. SPJM’s performance largely mirrors Scenario 1: it benefits early from borrowing the longitudinal target lesion process. Although SPJM includes an NL–OS shared-effect term, its gaussian-type dependence on the log scale cannot capture the Clayton lower-tail dependence used to generate Scenario 2. Consequently, for Scenario 2 we recommend baveJM or the copula model. In Scenario 3, where OS depends on the target lesion trajectory, baveJM and SPJM, the only methods that explicitly include a target lesion and OS link, clearly outperform the other three. With 100 and 200 deaths, SPJM has slightly lower bias and rMSE, likely because dense target lesion measurements yield precise subject-level effects that SPJM maps directly onto the OS scale, reducing variance early. As more deaths accrue (300 and 350), baveJM reallocates most of its weight to the target lesion and OS joint component and overtakes SPJM. Unlike Scenarios 1 and 2, the multi-state model does not improve monotonically, since it leverages progression states rather than the target lesion trajectory that actually drives OS here. SPJM has the widest intervals. It carries over uncertainty from the target lesion measurements and slope terms and also estimates extra terms (e.g., NT/NL frailties) that do not matter here, which adds noise. By contrast, as data accumulate, baveJM puts most of its weight on the single target lesion and OS submodel, so its intervals are tighter in comparison. In Scenario 4, OS depends on both the target lesion measurements and the time to appear-ance of a new lesion. Bias and rMSE tend to improve with more deaths, but not monotoni-cally across methods. The marginal OS model still lags because it ignores both target lesion DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 13 

measurements and new lesion information. baveJM and SPJM outperform the copula model, since they include a target lesion and OS link in addition to modeling NL–OS dependence. baveJM and SPJM perform similarly overall, with SPJM marginally ahead at some death counts, likely reflecting its direct target lesion and OS link (i.e., no averaging penalty) when target lesion measurements are highly informative. According to Figure 4, across all scenarios, the proposed baveJM approach performs con-sistently well and is the most reliable overall. When OS is independent of target lesion mea-surements (Scenario 1) or driven by NL–OS dependence (Scenario 2), baveJM closely tracks the copula model on bias and rMSE by placing most of its weight on the NL–OS component; when OS is driven by target lesion (Scenario 3), baveJM shifts weight to the target lesion and OS submodel and catches up to—and with more events, surpasses—SPJM; when both signals are present (Scenario 4), baveJM remains on par with SPJM and outperforms the cop-ula model by incorporating the target lesion effect. SPJM tends to show strong early point accuracy when target lesion is informative, but can be less well-calibrated when the target lesion and OS link is weak or absent. baveJM’s adaptive weighting yields competitive rMSE while maintaining robustness across the different data-generating scenarios. 

5. Analysis of the Renal Cell Carcinoma Trial Data. We return to the RCC trial dataset introduced in Section 2. To evaluate the model’s performance, we considered the trial data after 341 deaths were observed. The objective is to compare the predicted timing of the 341st death using different models described in Section 3 with the actual observed timing. The model’s performance was further evaluated by comparing the number of deaths predicted by different models with the observed number of deaths at the PFS final analyses. For this exercise, we generated snapshots of the trial data at the 100th, 146th (the time of the primary analysis), 200th, and 300th death and compared predictions under five models: baveJM, SPJM, a copula model for TTP and OS, a multi-state model, and a marginal model of OS. In addition to timing, we are interested in calculating the likelihood of demonstrating statistically significant OS in favor of the experimental drug at the updated OS analysis after 341 deaths. We included gender, age, nephrectomy at baseline, Heng prognostic criteria at baseline, and ECOG Performance Status into the covariate matrix Xi and Zi. Then, we fit each model using two MCMC chains, each with at least 10,000 MCMC iterations, in addition to 1,000 burn-in and 8,000 adaptation iterations. Convergence diagnostic tests, trace plots, and auto-correlation were investigated to ensure convergence. Figure 5a displays the predicted number of deaths at the time of the primary analysis. Figure 5b presents boxplots of the predictive dis-tributions for the predictors of the last (341st) death date from all tested models compared to the true last (341st) death date. The median values of the boxplots serve as point predictions. Figure 5c displays the posterior weights of all submodels for each dataset based on the speci-fied number of deaths. In this case study, baveJM, SPJM, and the copula model yield closely clustered central forecasts for the primary analysis death count, whereas the marginal and MS models exhibit greater dispersion. For the predicted date of the last (341st) death, baveJM and the copula model remain well-centered with comparatively tight dispersion across looks (100, 146, 200, and 300 deaths), and SPJM is broadly comparable. The marginal and MS models are substantially more variable. The submodel-weight plot indicates that baveJM does not commit to a single mechanism. Instead, it adaptively reallocates weight among TL, NT, NL, and marginal components as additional deaths accrue. The posterior odds favor the submodel capturing the association between non-target lesions and OS, consistent with current dis-ease knowledge. Taken together, these figures indicate that baveJM is the most robust across analyses, the copula model generally matches baveJM when NL/TTP carries signal, SPJM remains competitive without a persistent advantage, and the MS and marginal models display greater uncertainty in this case study. 14 146  

> 80 120 160 200
> 50 100

Number of death events when predicting 

> Number of predicted death events

Model baveJM SPJM Copula Marginal MS 

(a) 2020−04−19    

> 2018 2020 2022 2024 2026
> 100 146 200 300

Number of death events when predicting 

> Date

Model baveJM SPJM Copula Marginal MS 

(b) 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75     

> 50 100 146 200 300

Number of death events when predicting 

> Weights

Submodel TL NT NL Marginal 

(c) 

Fig 5: (a) Boxplots of the predicted number of deaths at primary analysis when 50 or 100 deaths are observed in the trial, with the true number of deaths being “146".(b) Boxplots of the posterior distributions of the last (341st) death date by baveJM, SPJM, the copula model between TTP and OS, the marginal Weibull baseline hazard model of OS, and the multi-state model. The date “2020-04-19" is the true last (341st) death date. (c) The final weights of each submodel under baveJM. DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 15                                                         

> TABLE 1
> Bias and rMSE of the predictors of baveJM, SPJM, copula model between TTP and OS, marginal model, and multi-state model (MS).
> No. of events Metric baveJM SPJM Copula Marginal MS Observed Predicted 100 41 Bias 11.35 9.86 9.23 12.75 3.46 rMSE 12.08 10.74 10.25 13.44 8.24 146 41 Bias 6.88 7.18 7.41 10.90 7.23 rMSE 8.36 8.92 8.97 12.03 10.14 200 41 Bias 4.23 5.02 4.77 8.57 6.56 rMSE 7.24 8.14 7.52 10.32 9.87 300 41 Bias 2.91 2.59 2.99 5.11 5.54 rMSE 8.57 8.80 8.46 9.26 11.24

Table 1 presents the bias and rMSE of the predicted OS from different models when 100, 146, 200, or 300 death events are observed. In this case study, baveJM performs similarly to SPJM and the copula model. Additionally, baveJM exhibits smaller bias and rMSEs com-pared to the marginal model under all scenarios. Overall, baveJM is consistently competitive, often best or near best on rMSE, while the copula model catches up or slightly leads at 300 death events. These patterns are consistent with Figures 5a–5c, which show stable point pre-dictions for the last death date and adaptive reweighting of submodels as information accrues. Finally, We used five models to forecast the death time of patients who were still alive after 341 deaths were observed. Subsequently, we generated predicted Kaplan-Meier plots for each model (Figure 6) and estimated the potential gain or loss in life expectancy by calculating the difference in the area under the curve between the experimental drug and the standard of care (Pak et al., 2017; Uno et al., 2022). The results from Figure 6 indicate that all models consistently project a substantial improvement in life years. In addition, baveJM, SPJM and the copula model, whose reliability was previously established in this case study, all forecast a at least 6.5-month gain in life years for patients who receive the experimental drug, as opposed to the standard of care. 

6. Discussion. We were motivated by an advanced RCC clinical trial to demonstrate how real-time OS predictions from joint models with different components of PFS can be dynamically combined via BMA. The proposed baveJM delivers reliable estimates of the time of the nth death and the probability of demonstrating an OS benefit after observing n

deaths, leveraging all available RECIST 1.1 tumor assessments. These capabilities are useful for trial planning and for informing end-of-life care. In both the case study and the simula-tion scenarios, baveJM provides robust, well-calibrated predictions, adapting to whichever progression component carries the strongest signal. Although developed in RCC, the frame-work is directly applicable to other solid tumors. baveJM is flexible and can accommodate linear longitudinal models with time-dependent covariates or nonlinear mixed-effects structures. BMA optimally pools evidence across sub-models but can be computationally intensive. Because the covariates entering each submodel need not be identical, it is advantageous to pre-select covariates for each component using do-main expertise or principled variable-selection procedures, which can reduce dimensionality and training time. The copula model linking time to progression (e.g., new lesion or TTP) and OS emerges as a strong performer. When TTP and OS are well described by Weibull marginals with random effects, the copula model typically outperforms a marginal OS-only model. As a practical option to reduce computation, fitting a copula model with random effects alone can deliver 16 Diff in AUC: 232 (151, 314) 

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

0 500 1000 1500 2000 

Days   

> Predicted OS by baveJM  Treatment Exp SOC

(a) Diff in AUC: 196 (116, 275) Diff in AUC: 196 (116, 275) 

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

0 500 1000 1500 2000 

Days    

> Predicted OS by SPJM  Treatment Exp SOC

(b) Diff in AUC: 254 (173, 334) 

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

0 500 1000 1500 2000 

Days   

> Predicted OS by Copula  Treatment Exp SOC

(c) Diff in AUC: 232 (162, 302) 

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

0 500 1000 1500 2000 

Days    

> Predicted OS by Marignal  Treatment Exp SOC

(d) Diff in AUC: 181 (87, 275) 

0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 

0 1000 2000 

Days   

> Predicted OS by MS
> Treatment Exp SOC

(e) 

Fig 6: Kaplan-Meier plots of the observed and predicted overall survival by baveJM (a), SPJM (b), the copula model (c), the marginal model (d), and the multi-state model (e). The difference in the area under the curve (AUC) and its credible intervals for the experimental drug (Exp) and the standard of care (SOC) are also included. DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 17 

accurate predictions when progression–survival dependence is present. Conversely, omitting random effects can yield overly heavy-tailed predictions in heterogeneous populations. The SPJM is competitive across analyses, particularly when the target lesion process is informative. With frequent target lesion assessments, subject-level target lesion effects are estimated precisely and a direct target lesion and OS link in SPJM can reduce variance and yield strong early point accuracy. However, when the target lesion and OS association is weak or absent, SPJM can be less well calibrated because it continues to load shared effects onto the OS scale. For a marginal OS model to perform better, it would be beneficial to incorporate more predictive covariates or use a model offering greater flexibility than the Weibull baseline hazard model, such as piecewise exponential models. Similarly, to improve the performance of the multi-state model, we could replace the Weibull baseline hazard model with more flexible models. During the simulation studies, the data for non-target lesions were not simulated, yet they were included in the example data analysis. This does not undermine the outcome of our sim-ulation studies, given that both the non-target lesion and new lesion were modeled using the exact same joint model, and each component of PFS was modeled separately. If the non-target lesion data had been included in the simulation dataset, we would have anticipated longer training times for baveJM without observing any relative improvement in performance. Apart from applying the same model weights to all patients in the dataset, BMA can po-tentially provide personalized model weights, where each patient may have different weights for each model. This could further improve the prediction accuracy. Future work can explore how to implement personalized model weights in a time-efficient manner in this study setting. REFERENCES 

ANDERSEN , P. K. and K EIDING , N. (2002). Multi-State Models for Event History Analysis. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 11 91–115. BRUNO , R., M ERCIER , F. and C LARET , L. (2014). Evaluation of Tumor Size Response Metrics to Predict Sur-vival in Oncology Clinical Trials. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics 95 386–393. CLARET , L., G IRARD , P., H OFF , P. M., V AN CUTSEM , E., Z UIDEVELD , K. P., J ORGA , K., F AGERBERG , J. and B RUNO , R. (2009). Model-Based Prediction of Phase III Overall Survival in Colorectal Cancer on the Basis of Phase II Tumor Dynamics. Journal of Clinical Oncology 27 4103–4108. CLARET , L., G UPTA , M., H AN , K., J OSHI , A., S ARAPA , N., H E, J., P OWELL , B. and B RUNO , R. (2013). Evaluation of Tumor-Size Response Metrics to Predict Overall Survival in Western and Chinese Patients With First-Line Metastatic Colorectal Cancer. Journal of Clinical Oncology 31 2110–2114. CLAYTON , D. G. (1978). A Model for Association in Bivariate Life Tables and Its Application in Epidemiological Studies of Familial Tendency in Chronic Disease Incidence. Biometrika 65 141–151. COMMITTEE , P. B. A. et al. (2016). Guidelines for Preparing Submissions to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Advi-sory Committee (PBAC). Health Do, editor. Canberra2016 .CONGDON , P. (2007). Model Weights for Model Choice and Averaging. Statistical Methodology 4 143–157. COX , D. R. and M ILLER , H. D. (1977). The Theory of Stochastic Processes 134 . CRC press. DIAS , S., W ELTON , N. J., S UTTON , A. J. and A DES , A. (2011). NICE DSU Technical Support Document 2: A Generalised Linear Modelling Framework for Pairwise and Network Meta-Analysis of Randomised Controlled Trials. DRISCOLL , J. J. and R IXE , O. (2009). Overall Survival: Still the Gold Standard: Why Overall Survival Remains the Definitive End Point in Cancer Clinical Trials. The Cancer Journal 15 401–405. EISENHAUER , E. A., T HERASSE , P., B OGAERTS , J., S CHWARTZ , L. H., S ARGENT , D., F ORD , R., D ANCEY , J., ARBUCK , S., G WYTHER , S., M OONEY , M. et al. (2009). New Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumours: Revised RECIST Guideline (Version 1.1). European Journal of Cancer 45 228–247. FLEISCHER , F., G ASCHLER -M ARKEFSKI , B. and B LUHMKI , E. (2009). A Statistical Model for the Dependence Between Progression-Free Survival and Overall Survival. Statistics in Medicine 28 2669–2686.  

> FOR

DRUGS , C. A., IN HEALTH , T. et al. (2006). Guidelines for the Economic Evaluation of Health Technolo-gies: Canada. 18 

FU, H., W ANG , Y., L IU , J., K ULKARNI , P. M. and M ELEMED , A. S. (2013). Joint Modeling of Progression-Free Survival and Overall Survival by a Bayesian Normal Induced Copula Estimation Model. Statistics in Medicine 

32 240–254. GELMAN , A., C ARLIN , J. B., S TERN , H. S. and R UBIN , D. B. (2014). Bayesian Data Analysis (Vol. 2). GRIGORE , B., C IANI , O., D AMS , F., F EDERICI , C., DE GROOT , S., M ÖLLENKAMP , M., R ABBE , S., S HA -

> TROV

, K., Z EMPLENYI , A. and T AYLOR , R. S. (2020). Surrogate Endpoints in Health Technology Assess-ment: An International Review of Methodological Guidelines. Pharmacoeconomics 38 1055–1070. HEEG , B., G ARCIA , A., B EEKHUIZEN , S. V., V ERHOEK , A., O OSTRUM , I. V., R OYCHOUDHURY , S., C AP -

> PELLERI

, J. C., P OSTMA , M. J. and N ICOLAAS MARTINUS OUWENS , M. J. (2022). Novel and Existing Flexible Survival Methods for Network Meta-Analyses. Journal of Comparative Effectiveness Research 11 

1121–1133. HENDERSON , R., J ONES , M. and S TARE , J. (2001). Accuracy of Point Predictions in Survival Analysis. Statistics in Medicine 20 3083–3096. HENG , D. Y., X IE , W., B JARNASON , G. A., V AISHAMPAYAN , U., T AN , M.-H., K NOX , J., D ONSKOV , F., WOOD , L., K OLLMANNSBERGER , C., R INI , B. I. et al. (2011). Progression-Free Survival as a Predictor of Overall Survival in Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Treated With Contemporary Targeted Therapy. Cancer 

117 2637–2642. HOETING , J. A., M ADIGAN , D., R AFTERY , A. E. and V OLINSKY , C. T. (1999). Bayesian Model Averaging: A Tutorial (With Comments by M. Clyde, David Draper and Ei George, and a Rejoinder by the Authors. 

Statistical Science 14 382–417. LATIMER , N. (2011). NICE DSU Technical Support Document 14: Survival Analysis for Economic Evaluations Alongside Clinical Trials-Extrapolation With Patient-Level Data. Report by the Decision Support Unit .LAWRENCE GOULD , A., B OYE , M. E., C ROWTHER , M. J., I BRAHIM , J. G., Q UARTEY , G., M ICALLEF , S. and BOIS , F. Y. (2015). Joint modeling of survival and longitudinal non-survival data: current methods and issues. Report of the DIA Bayesian joint modeling working group. Statistics in medicine 34 2181–2195. LIM , H.-S., S UN , W., P ARIVAR , K. and W ANG , D. (2019). Predicting Overall Survival and Progression-Free Survival Using Tumor Dynamics in Advanced Breast Cancer Patients. The AAPS Journal 21 1–12. MACKILLOP , W. J. and Q UIRT , C. F. (1997). Measuring the Accuracy of Prognostic Judgments in Oncology. 

Journal of Clinical Epidemiology 50 21–29. MEIRA -M ACHADO , L., DE UÑA -Á LVAREZ , J., C ADARSO -S UÁREZ , C. and A NDERSEN , P. K. (2009). Multi-State Models for the Analysis of Time-To-Event Data. Statistical Methods in Medical Research 18 195–222. MELLER , M., B EYERSMANN , J. and R UFIBACH , K. (2019). Joint Modeling of Progression-Free and Overall Survival and Computation of Correlation Measures. Statistics in Medicine 38 4270–4289. METHY , N., B EDENNE , L. and B ONNETAIN , F. (2010). Surrogate Endpoints for Overall Survival in Digestive Oncology Trials: Which Candidates? A Questionnaires Survey Among Clinicians and Methodologists. BMC Cancer 10 1–9. MOTZER , R. J., P ENKOV , K., H AANEN , J., R INI , B., A LBIGES , L., C AMPBELL , M. T., V ENUGOPAL , B., KOLLMANNSBERGER , C., N EGRIER , S., U EMURA , M. et al. (2019). Avelumab Plus Axitinib Versus Suni-tinib for Advanced Renal-Cell Carcinoma. New England Journal of Medicine 380 1103–1115. PAK , K., U NO , H., K IM , D. H., T IAN , L., K ANE , R. C., T AKEUCHI , M., F U, H., C LAGGETT , B. and W EI , L.-J. (2017). Interpretability of Cancer Clinical Trial Results Using Restricted Mean Survival Time as an Alternative to the Hazard Ratio. JAMA Oncology 3 1692–1696. PLUMMER , M. (2017). Jags Version 4.3. 0 User Manual [Computer Software Manual]. Retrieved from Source-forge. net/projects/mcmc-jags/files/Manuals/4. x 2.PUTTER , H., F IOCCO , M. and G ESKUS , R. B. (2007). Tutorial in Biostatistics: Competing Risks and Multi-State Models. Statistics in Medicine 26 2389–2430. RATCLIFFE , S. J., G UO , W. and T EN HAVE , T. R. (2004). Joint modeling of longitudinal and survival data via a common frailty. Biometrics 60 892–899. ROYLE , K.-L., M EADS , D., V ISSER -R OGERS , J. K., W HITE , I. R. and C AIRNS , D. A. (2023). How Is Overall Survival Assessed in Randomised Clinical Trials in Cancer and Are Subsequent Treatment Lines Considered? A Systematic Review. Trials 24 708. SBOROV , K., GIARETTA , S., KOONG , A., AGGARWAL , S., ASLAKSON , R., GENSHEIMER , M. F., CHANG , D. T. and P OLLOM , E. L. (2019). Impact of Accuracy of Survival Predictions on Quality of End-Of-Life Care Among Patients With Metastatic Cancer Who Receive Radiation Therapy. Journal of Oncology Practice 15 e262–e270. SHUKUYA , T., M ORI , K., A MANN , J. M., B ERTINO , E. M., O TTERSON , G. A., S HIELDS , P. G., M ORITA , S. and C ARBONE , D. P. (2016). Relationship Between Overall Survival and Response or Progression-Free Sur-vival in Advanced Non–Small Cell Lung Cancer Patients Treated With Anti–Pd-1/Pd-L1 Antibodies. Journal of Thoracic Oncology 11 1927–1939. DYNAMIC PREDICTION OF TARGET SURVIVAL TIME 19 

SKLAR , M. (1959). Fonctions de répartition à n dimensions et leurs marges. In Annales de l’ISUP 8 229–231. STEIN , A., BELLMUNT , J., ESCUDIER , B., KIM , D., STERGIOPOULOS , S. G., MIETLOWSKI , W., MOTZER , R. J., G ROUP , R.-. T. S. et al. (2013). Survival Prediction in Everolimus-Treated Patients With Metastatic Renal Cell Carcinoma Incorporating Tumor Burden Response in the Record-1 Trial. European Urology 64 994–1002. TANG , P. A., B ENTZEN , S. M., C HEN , E. X. and S IU , L. L. (2007). Surrogate End Points for Median Overall Survival in Metastatic Colorectal Cancer: Literature-Based Analysis From 39 Randomized Controlled Trials of First-Line Chemotherapy. Journal of Clinical Oncology 25 4562–4568. UNO , H., T IAN , L., H ORIGUCHI , M., C RONIN , A., B ATTIOUI , C. and B ELL , J. (2022). survRM2: Comparing Restricted Mean Survival Time R package version 1.0-4. VONESH , E. F., G REENE , T. and S CHLUCHTER , M. D. (2006). Shared parameter models for the joint analysis of longitudinal data and event times. Statistics in medicine 25 143–163. WANG , Y., S UNG , C., D ARTOIS , C., R AMCHANDANI , R., B OOTH , B., R OCK , E. and G OBBURU , J. (2009). Elucidation of Relationship Between Tumor Size and Survival in Non-small-Cell Lung Cancer Patients Can Aid Early Decision Making in Clinical Drug Development. Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics 86 167– 174. WEBER , E. M. and T ITMAN , A. C. (2019). Quantifying the Association Between Progression-Free Survival and Overall Survival in Oncology Trials Using Kendall’s τ . Statistics in Medicine 38 703–719. YU, J., W ANG , N. and K ÅGEDAL , M. (2020). A New Method to Model and Predict Progression Free Survival Based on Tumor Growth Dynamics. Cpt: Pharmacometrics & Systems Pharmacology 9 177–184. ZECCHIN , C., G UEORGUIEVA , I., E NAS , N. H. and F RIBERG , L. E. (2016). Models for Change in Tumour Size, Appearance of New Lesions and Survival Probability in Patients With Advanced Epithelial Ovarian Cancer. 

British Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 82 717–727. Supplementary Materials for Dynamic Prediction of Milestones for Survival Endpoints in Metastatic Solid Tumor Cancer Clinical Trials 

## Sidi Wang Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan Kelley M Kidwell Department of Biostatistics, University of Michigan Bo Huang Pfizer Inc., New York, NY, U.S.A. and Satrajit Roychoudhury Pfizer Inc., New York, NY, U.S.A. April 23, 2026     

> 1−100 0100 200
> 0510 15 20

Tumor assessment number  

> Percentage Change from baseline LD
> average individual

Experimental drug (a) −100 0100 200     

> 0510 15 20

Tumor assessment number  

> Percentage Change from baseline LD
> average individual

Standard of care (b) 

Supplementary Figure 1: Profile plot of the sum of the longest diameter of target lesions 2++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++ ++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++ + HR = 0.68 (0.54, 0.85) p = 5.3150e−04    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 0500 1000 1500

Days  

> Proportion w/t PD for  TL
> Treatment

+ +SOC Exp (a) ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++ +++++ ++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ + +++++++++++++++++ + HR = 0.65 (0.48, 0.88) p = 0.006    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0500 1000 1500

Days  

> Proportion w/t PD for NT  Treatment

+ +SOC Exp (b) ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++ ++++ + +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ +++ +++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++ + HR = 0.64 (0.52, 0.78) p = 1.2930e−05    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0500 1000 1500

Days  

> Proportion w/t PD for NL  Treatment

+ +SOC Exp 

(c) +++++++++++++++ +++++++++ +++ +++++ +++ + ++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ + +++ + +++ +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ HR = 0.79 (0.64, 0.98) p = 3.1202e−02    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0500 1000 1500

Days  

> Overall survival
> Treatment

+ +SOC Exp (d) +++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ + +++ + + +++++++ +++++++++++ +++++++++++ +++++++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++ ++ + + ++ +++++++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++ ++++++++++++++++++ +++++ ++++++++++++++++ + HR = 0.68 (0.58, 0.81) p = 6.7418e−06    

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 0500 1000 1500

Days  

> Progression−free survival  Treatment

+ +SOC Exp 

(e) 

Supplementary Figure 2: Kaplan-Meier plots at the time of updated OS analysis considering target lesions progressive disease (PD) (a), non-target lesions PD (b), new lesions PD (c), overall survival (d), and progression-free survival (e). 31 Likelihood derivation for the joint model between target lesion and OS 

The marginal distribution of the observed measurements μ is easily obtained. The likeli-hood for the observed data can be factorized as the product of this marginal distribution and the conditional distribution of OS, given the observed values of μ. Let θ1 denote the combined vector of unknown parameters. Conditional on lesion measurements μ, OS is independent of these measurements μ, so we can write the likelihood L = L(θ1, μ, OS ) as 

L = Lμ(θ1, μ ) × LOS |μ(θ1, OS |μ), where Lμ(θ1, μ ) is of standard form corresponding to the marginal multivariate normal distribution of μ and 

LOS |μ(θ1, OS |μ) = Y

> i

 

λ0(t) exp( Z′

> i

βOS + λμ i(t)) 

δOS,i 

× exp 



−

Z yOS,i 

> 0

λ0(t) exp( Z′

> i

βOS + λμ i(t)) dt 

 

,

Here, yOS,i = min( tOS,i , c OS,i ) and δOS,i = I(tOS,i ≤ cOS,i ). cOS,i is the censoring time for the ith participant and tOS,i is the true event time. 42 Likelihood derivation for the copula model of the non-target lesion and OS 

For non-target lesion, we define yNT = min( tNT , c NT ) and δNT = I(tNT ≤ cNT ), where cNT 

and I(·) denote the censoring time and the indicator function, respectively; and define yOS 

and δOS similarly for OS. Depending on the censoring pattern, the observed data for the ith participant falls into one of the following mutually exclusive cases: 1) both tN T and tOS are observed ( δN T =1, 

δOS =1), 2) tN T is observed and tOS is censored ( δN T =1, δOS =0), 3) tN T is censored and 

tOS is observed ( δN T =0, δOS =1), and 4) both tN T and tOS are censored ( δN T =0, δOS =0). Based on these four scenarios, we derive the likelihood of the copula model. Let θ2 = ( βNT , α NT , λ NT , βOSNT , α OSNT , λ OS , η NT ), then the likelihood for the ith pa-tient with Data i = ( yNT , y OS , δ NT , δ OS , Z)i is given by 

L(θ2|Data i) = LδNT δOS  

> 1

LδNT (1 −δOS )2 L(1 −δNT )δOS  

> 3

L(1 −δNT )(1 −δOS )4 ,

where 

L1 = ∂2 S1(tNT , t OS |Z)

∂t NT ∂t OS tNT =yNT ,t OS =yOS 

=



ηNT + 1 

 

exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}

−(ηNT +1) 

×



exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}−ηNT + exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}−ηNT − 1

− 2ηNT +1 

> ηNT

×γNT αNT yαNT −1NT exp( Z′βNT )exp {− γNT tαNT exp( Z′βNT )}×γOS αOSNT yαOSNT −1OS exp( Z′βOSNT )exp {− γOS tαOSNT exp( Z′βOSNT )}

and 

L2 = −∂S 1(tNT , t OS |Z)

∂t NT tNT =yNT ,t OS =yOS 

5=



exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}

−(ηNT +1) 

×



exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}−ηNT + exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}−ηNT − 1

− ηNT +1 

> ηNT

×γNT αNT yαNT −1NT exp( Z′βNT )exp {− γNT tαNT exp( Z′βNT )}

and 

L3 = −∂S 1(tNT , t OS |Z)

∂t OS tNT =yNT ,t OS =yOS 

=



exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}

−(ηNT +1) 

×



exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}−ηNT + exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}−ηNT − 1

− ηNT +1 

> ηNT

×γOS αOSNT yαOSNT −1OS exp( Z′βOSNT )exp {− γOS tαOSNT exp( Z′βOSNT )}

and 

L4 = S1(tNT , t OS |Z) tNT =yNT ,t OS =yOS 

= {exp {− γNT yαNT  

> NT

exp( Z′βNT )}−ηNT + exp {− γOS yαOSNT  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNT )}−ηNT − 1}−1/η NT 

For a given subject, L1, L2, L3 and L4 correspond to the likelihood components that both NT and OS are observed, NT is observed but OS is censored, NT is censored but OS is observed, and both NT and OS are censored, respectively. 63 Likelihood derivation for the copula model of the new lesion and OS 

For new lesion, we define yNL = min( tNL , c NL ) and δNL = I(tNL ≤ cNL ), where cNL and I(·)denote the censoring time and the indicator function, respectively; and define yOS and δOS 

similarly for OS. Depending on the censoring pattern, the observed data for the ith participant falls into one of the following mutually exclusive cases: 1) both tN L and tOS are observed (δN L =1, δOS =1), 2) tN L is observed and tOS is censored ( δN L =1, δOS =0), 3) tN L is censored and tOS is observed ( δN L =0, δOS =1), and 4) both tN L and tOS are censored ( δN L =0, 

δOS =0). Based on these four scenarios, we derive the likelihood of the copula model. Let 

θ3 = ( βNL , α NL , λ NL , βOSNL , α OSNL , λ OS , η NL ), then the likelihood for the ith patient with Data i = ( yNL , y OS , δ NL , δ OS , Z)i is given by 

L(θ3|Data i) = LδNL δOS  

> 1

LδNL (1 −δOS )2 L(1 −δNL )δOS  

> 3

L(1 −δNL )(1 −δOS )4 ,

where 

L1 = ∂2 S2(tNL , t OS |Z)

∂t NL ∂t OS tNL =yNL ,t OS =yOS 

=



ηNL + 1 

 

exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}

−(ηNL +1) 

×



exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}−ηNL + exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}−ηNL − 1

− 2ηNL +1 

> ηNL

×γNL αNL yαNL −1NL exp( Z′βNL )exp {− γNL tαNL exp( Z′βNL )}×γOS αOSNL yαOSNL −1OS exp( Z′βOSNL )exp {− γOS tαOSNL exp( Z′βOSNL )}

and 

L2 = −∂S 2(tNL , t OS |Z)

∂t NL tNL =yNL ,t OS =yOS 

7=



exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}

−(ηNL +1) 

×



exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}−ηNL + exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}−ηNL − 1

− ηNL +1 

> ηNL

×γNL αNL yαNL −1NL exp( Z′βNL )exp {− γNL tαNL exp( Z′βNL )}

and 

L3 = −∂S 2(tNL , t OS |Z)

∂t OS tNL =yNL ,t OS =yOS 

=



exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}

−(ηNL +1) 

×



exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}−ηNL + exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}−ηNL − 1

− ηNL +1 

> ηNL

×γOS αOSNL yαOSNL −1OS exp( Z′βOSNL )exp {− γOS tαOSNL exp( Z′βOSNL )}

and 

L4 = S1(tNL , t OS |Z) tNL =yNL ,t OS =yOS 

= {exp {− γNL yαNL  

> NL

exp( Z′βNL )}−ηNL + exp {− γOS yαOSNL  

> OS

exp( Z′βOSNL )}−ηNL − 1}−1/η NL 

For a given subject, L1, L2, L3 and L4 correspond to the likelihood components that both NL and OS are observed, NL is observed but OS is censored, NL is censored but OS is observed, and both NL and OS are censored, respectively. 84 Likelihood derivation for the copula model between TTP and OS 

For TTP, define yTTP = min( tTTP , c TTP ) and δTTP = I(tTTP ≤ cTTP ), where cTTP and 

I(·) denote the censoring time and the indicator function, respectively; and define yOS and 

δOS similarly for OS. Depending on the censoring pattern, the observed data for the ith participant falls into one of the four mutually exclusive cases: ( δT T P =1, δOS =1), ( δT T P =1, 

δOS =0), ( δT T P =0, δOS =1), and ( δT T P =0, δOS =0). Let θT T P = ( βTTP , α TTP , λ TTP , βOSTTP , α OSTTP , λ OS , η TTP ), then the likelihood for the 

ith patient with Data i = ( yTTP , y OS , δ TTP , δ OS , Z)i is given by 

L(θT T P |Data i) = LδTTP δOS 

1 LδTTP (1 −δOS )2 L(1 −δTTP )δOS 

3 L(1 −δTTP )(1 −δOS )4 ,

where 

L1 = ∂2 S2(tTTP , t OS |Z)

∂t TTP ∂t OS tTTP =yTTP ,t OS =yOS 

=



ηTTP +1 

 

exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}

−(ηTTP +1) 

×



exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}−ηTTP +exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}−ηTTP −1

− 2ηTTP +1 

> ηTTP

×γTTP αTTP yαTTP −1TTP exp( Z′βTTP )exp {− γTTP tαTTP exp( Z′βTTP )}×γOS αOSTTP yαOSTTP −1OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )exp {− γOS tαOSTTP exp( Z′βOSTTP )}

and 

L2 = −∂S 2(tTTP , t OS |Z)

∂t TTP tTTP =yTTP ,t OS =yOS 

=



exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}

−(ηTTP +1) 

9×



exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}−ηTTP +exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}−ηTTP −1

− ηTTP +1 

> ηTTP

×γTTP αTTP yαTTP −1TTP exp( Z′βTTP )exp {− γTTP tαTTP exp( Z′βTTP )}

and 

L3 = −∂S 2(tTTP , t OS |Z)

∂t OS tTTP =yTTP ,t OS =yOS 

=



exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}

−(ηTTP +1) 

×



exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}−ηTTP +exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}−ηTTP −1

− ηTTP +1 

> ηTTP

×γOS αOSTTP yαOSTTP −1OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )exp {− γOS tαOSTTP exp( Z′βOSTTP )}

and 

L4 = S1(tTTP , t OS |Z) tTTP =yTTP ,t OS =yOS 

= {exp {− γTTP yαTTP 

TTP exp( Z′βTTP )}−ηTTP +exp {− γOS yαOSTTP 

OS exp( Z′βOSTTP )}−ηTTP −1}−1/η TTP 

For a given subject, L1, L 2, L3 and L4 correspond to the likelihood components that both TTP and OS are observed, TTP is observed but OS is censored, TTP is censored but OS is observed, and both TTP and OS are censored, respectively. 10 State 0 

Randomization 

State 1 

Progression 

State 2 

Death 

𝜋 !" (𝑡 )

𝜋 !# (𝑡 ) 𝜋 "# (𝑠 )Supplementary Figure 3: The multi-state (three-state illness-death) model 11 5 Likelihood derivation for the multi-state model 

For the multi-state model, we aim to estimate the parameter vector 

θ = ( α, γ 01 , γ 02 , γ 12 )using maximum likelihood estimation. 

Modeling the Survival Experiences :Individual survival experiences can be characterized by four distinct cases based on a patient’s progression through the multi-state model: 1. Patients progress and are then censored. 2. Patients progress and subsequently die. 3. Patients die without prior progression. 4. Patients are censored without experiencing either progression or death. For every individual i in the set (1 , ..., n ): 

• ti1 indicates the duration from the initial state to either progression or death. 

• ti2, which is conditioned on progression, represents the time from progression to death. 

Likelihood Estimation for Individual Experiences :The individual likelihood for these experiences, denoted as L(k) 

> i

(θ) where k varies from 1 to 4, can be described as: 

L(1)  

> i

(θ) = f1(ti1)S2(ti1)S3(ti2)

L(2)  

> i

(θ) = f1(ti1)S2(ti1)f3(ti2)12 L(3)  

> i

(θ) = S1(ti1)f2(ti1)

L(4)  

> i

(θ) = S1(ti1)S2(ti1)Here: 

• f1(·) and S1(·): Density and survival function for time to progression. 

• f2(·) and S2(·): Density and survival function for time to death without progression. 

• f3(·) and S3(·): Density and survival function for time to death post progression. 

Overall Log-Likelihood :The comprehensive log-likelihood for all subjects can be formulated as: log( L(θ)) = 

> n

X

> i=1

(d1)(1 − d2)(1 − d3)L(1)  

> i

(θ)+ ( d1)(1 − d2)( d3)L(2)  

> i

(θ)+ (1 − d1)( d2)L(3)  

> i

(θ)+ (1 − d1)(1 − d2)L(4)  

> i

(θ),

Where: 

• d1: Indicator for progression. 

• d2: Indicator for death without preceding progression. 

• d3: Indicator for death post progression. Note: An indicator value of 0 represents censoring, whereas a value of 1 indicates the event’s occurrence. 13 Supplementary Table 1: The coverage rate (CR) and credible interval (CI) width for pre-dictors of the time of the last death. Comparing the results from the multivariate joint modeling approach (baveJM), a shared-parameter random-effect joint model (SPJM), a copula model between TTP and OS (Cop), , a multi-state model (MS), and the marginal Weibull baseline hazard model of OS (Mrgl). The unit for CI width is month. Independent OS OS dep. on NL baveJM SPJM Cop Mrgl MS baveJM SPJM Cop Mrgl MS 

100 death event 

CR 0.78 1.00 0.86 0.00 0.83 0.30 1.00 0.85 0.00 0.93 Width 53.2 68.1 54.7 17.1 55.4 38.2 68.6 54.6 16.9 59.7 

200 death event 

CR 0.96 0.89 0.97 0.00 0.61 0.92 0.89 0.98 0.00 0.78 Width 54.0 50.9 54.7 20.0 42.4 54.6 51.8 54.6 20.0 46.1 

300 death event 

CR 1.00 0.70 1.00 0.01 0.57 0.96 0.71 0.99 0.00 0.74 Width 49.8 37.6 49.9 19.8 34.3 50.0 38.4 49.8 19.4 37.5 

350 death event 

CR 1.00 0.68 1.00 0.06 0.65 0.95 0.66 1.00 0.02 0.76 Width 45.3 31.4 45.6 18.4 29.7 42.1 31.9 45.5 18.1 32.8 14 OS dep. on TL OS dep. on both NL and TL baveJM SPJM Cop Mrgl MS baveJM SPJM Cop Mrgl MS 

100 death event 

CR 0.96 1.00 0.05 0.00 0.40 0.91 1.00 0.92 0.00 1.00 Width 73.2 85.0 43.9 9.8 47.7 64.6 71.6 55.0 18.8 66.6 

200 death event 

CR 0.83 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.99 1.00 0.87 0.00 0.98 Width 58.0 74.9 30.1 8.2 20.6 58.7 68.9 48.4 16.3 53.7 

300 death event 

CR 0.97 1.00 0.04 0.00 0.00 0.98 1.00 0.80 0.00 0.90 Width 59.3 65.0 34.7 12.6 18.6 47.5 59.7 38.9 15.0 40.1 

350 death event 

CR 1.00 1.00 0.77 0.00 0.00 0.96 1.00 0.87 0.00 0.89 Width 55.9 59.6 41.7 16.8 20.2 38.9 60.0 34.6 14.2 34.2 15 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00    

> 100 200 300 350

Independent OS 

1   

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 100 200 300 350

OS dependent on NL 

2   

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75
> 100 200 300 350

OS dependent on TL 

3   

> 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00
> 100 200 300 350

submodel TL NL Marginal 

OS dependent on both NL and TL 

4

Weights Supplementary Figure 4: The weights of all submodels of the multivariate joint modeling approach for each snapshot dataset in the simulation studies. 16