Title: FD-NL2SQL: Feedback-Driven Clinical NL2SQL that Improves with Use

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15646v1

Published Time: Mon, 20 Apr 2026 00:23:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 12

Markdown Content:
## FD-NL2S QL : Feedback-Driven Clinical NL2SQL that Improves with Use 

1Suparno Roy Chowdhury * 1Tejas Anvekar * 1Manan Roy Choudhury *

2Muhammad Ali Khan 2Kaneez Zahra Rubab Khakwani 2Mohamad Bassam Sonbol 

2Irbaz Bin Riaz † 1Vivek Gupta †

Arizona State University 1 Mayo Clinic 2

 Project Page  Demo Å Video § Code 

riaz.irbaz@mayo.edu, vgupt140@asu.edu 

Abstract 

Clinicians exploring oncology trial reposito-ries often need ad-hoc, multi-constraint queries over biomarkers, endpoints, interventions, and time, yet writing SQL requires schema ex-pertise. We demo FD-NL2S QL , a feedback-driven clinical NL2SQL assistant for SQLite-based oncology databases. Given a natural-language question, a schema-aware LLM de-composes it into predicate-level sub-questions, retrieves semantically similar expert-verified NL2SQL exemplars via sentence embeddings, and synthesizes executable SQL conditioned on the decomposition, retrieved exemplars, and schema, with post-processing validity checks. To improve with use, FD-NL2S QL incorpo-rates two update signals: (i) clinician edits of generated SQL are approved and added to the exemplar bank; and (ii) lightweight logic-based SQL augmentation applies a single atomic mu-tation (e.g., operator or column change), re-taining variants only if they return non-empty results. A second LLM generates the corre-sponding natural-language question and predi-cate decomposition for accepted variants, auto-matically expanding the exemplar bank without additional annotation. The demo interface ex-poses decomposition, retrieval, synthesis, and execution results to support interactive refine-ment and continuous improvement. 

1 Introduction 

Clinical trial databases are central to modern on-cology research and drug development. Public reg-istries such as ClinicalTrials.gov (Zarin et al., 2011) and institutional repositories contain rich structured data, including trial phase, biomarkers, eligibility criteria, endpoints, recruitment status, and sponsor information, supporting competitive intelligence, hypothesis generation, regulatory planning, and translational research. As oncology increasingly 

> *

These authors contributed equally. 

> †

Corresponding authors. Show trials of CTLA -4 for non -                                                                  

> small cell lung cancer that began
> in 2018 or later ?
> Which trials have Name of ICI = ' CTLA -4'?
> Which trials have Cancer type =
> 'Non -small cell lung cancer’ ?
> Which trials have Year >= 2018 ?
> SELECT “Year”
> FROM clinical_trials
> WHERE “Cancer type” =‘Renal cell’ ;
> AND “Name of ICI" =‘Nivolumab, Ipilimumab’
> AND “Follow -up durat ion for primary
> endpoint(s) in months |Overall” >21 ;
> SELECT “NCT” ,“Cancer type” ,
> FROM clinical_trials
> WHERE “Cancer type” =‘Non -Small Cell Lung’ ;
> SELECT “NCT” ,“Class of ICI” ,
> FROM clinical_trials
> WHERE “Class of ICI” =‘CTLA -4’
> Final SQL Synthesizer
> SELECT “NCT” ,“Author” ,“Year”,
> “Originial publication or Follow -up” ,
> “Class of ICI” ,“Cancer type” ,“Trial phase”
> FROM clinical_trials
> WHERE “Cancer type” =‘Non -Small Cell Lung’
> AND “Class of ICI” =‘CTLA -4’
> AND “Year” >= 2018 ;
> Query
> Decomposer
> Retrieved
> SQL from
> Decomposed
> Queries
> DB
> Schema
> Add to
> Exemplar
> Bank
> SQL
> Modification
> Tool

FD -NL 2SQL       

> Approved Exemplars
> NL 2 SQL
> Analysis Framework
> •Exact Match
> •AST Score
> •F1 / Prec / Recall
> •LLM Confidence
> Logic Based
> SQL
> Augmentatio n
> Expert
> Verified
> Exemplar
> Bank

Figure 1: A clinician question is decomposed into schema-aligned predicate sub-questions; for each pred-icate, semantically similar expert-approved exemplars are retrieved; This guides schema-grounded SQL syn-thesizer. Users can edit and approve the final SQL to update the exemplar bank. To expand coverage with minimal annotation, approved SQL is augmented by a single atomic mutation (e.g., operator or column substi-tution) and retained only if it returns non-empty results. A second LLM back-translates augmented SQL into a NL-question & predicate sub-questions, new samples are added to the bank for continual improvement. 

shifts toward biomarker-driven and precision trials, efficient access to this structured data is critical. Yet these databases remain difficult to query. Ac-cess typically requires SQL expertise and detailed schema knowledge, Schemas are often complex, spanning multiple relational tables for eligibility, in-terventions, endpoints, & disease ontologies. Clini-cians and translational researchers, though domain experts, are rarely trained in database querying, leading to analyst-mediated workflows that slow iterative exploration. In the high-stakes setting of oncology drug development, this friction directly affects research velocity & decision quality. Existing tools only partially mitigate this 1

> arXiv:2604.15646v1 [cs.CL] 17 Apr 2026

gap. Registry interfaces rely on keyword-based search (Zarin et al., 2011), which cannot reliably enforce structured multi-constraint filtering (e.g., biomarker + phase + endpoint + recruitment crite-ria). Business intelligence dashboards (Chen et al., 2012) provide predefined reports but remain rigid and cannot cover the combinatorial space of ex-ploratory clinical queries. Natural Language to SQL (NL2SQL) sys-tems have advanced substantially in recent years, beginning with neural approaches such as Seq2SQL (Zhong et al., 2017) & large-scale bench-marks such as Spider (Yu et al., 2018). More re-cent work has introduced schema-aware reason-ing (e.g., RAT-SQL (Wang et al., 2020)) & con-strained decoding for syntactic validity (e.g., PI-CARD (Scholak et al., 2021)). Large Language Models (LLMs) further demonstrate strong in-context semantic parsing capabilities (Brown et al., 2020). However, these systems are largely de-signed for general-purpose benchmarks & do not explicitly incorporate domain-aware constraint de-composition, exemplar retrieval grounded in clini-cal schemas, or interactive feedback loops tailored to high-stakes biomedical querying. In specialized domains such as oncology, naive generation with-out schema-aligned grounding & domain-specific retrieval can lead to brittle or clinically implausible queries. To address these limitations, we introduce a domain-aware NL2SQL system designed specif-ically for oncology clinical trial databases. Our approach integrates three core components. First, we perform LLM-guided self-evolving decompo-sition of a user’s question into atomic, schema-aligned sub-questions that each correspond to a filterable predicate. Second, we retrieve seman-tically similar seed exemplars using Sentence-BERT embeddings (Reimers and Gurevych, 2019), enabling structured grounding in prior validated query patterns. Third, we perform retrieval-guided SQL synthesis with controlled decoding and post-processing to ensure structural validity and con-straint satisfaction. This decomposition-retrieval-synthesis architecture improves robustness by align-ing generation with both schema structure and domain-specific precedent. Beyond static query translation, our system op-erates as a living clinical review assistant . Each generated query can be previewed, refined, and cor-rected interactively. User feedback on retrieved ex-emplars and synthesized SQL is incorporated into the seed bank, improving retrieval neighborhoods and generation fidelity over time. This feedback-driven refinement is consistent with emerging paradigms of interactive and adaptive language model systems (Brown et al., 2020), but is opera-tionalized here in a structured, database-grounded clinical setting. As clinicians issue more domain-specific queries, the system progressively aligns with real-world oncology reasoning patterns. From a clinician’s perspective, this approach sub-stantially reduces dependency on technical needs, accelerates hypothesis testing, & enables real-time, multi-constraint exploration of trial crite-rias. By combining domain-aware decomposition, exemplar-guided synthesis, and iterative feedback, the system bridges the gap between oncology ex-pertise and structured data access, transforming static registries into interactive analytical tools. Finally, our main contributions are: • A schema-aware, predicate-level decomposi-tion strategy that improves robustness of clini-cal NL2SQL in complex oncology databases. • A retrieval-guided SQL synthesis pipeline that grounds LLM generation in expert-verified exemplars for reliable query construction. • Feedback-driven, self-evolving clinical trial query assistant that improves continuously through clinician interaction. 

2 Related Work 

Recent advances in text-to-SQL have shifted from supervised semantic parsing toward large language model (LLM) prompting and in-context learning. DIN-SQL (Pourreza and Rafiei, 2023) demon-strates that decomposed prompting improves SQL generation by breaking complex questions into in-termediate reasoning steps. Similarly, execution-guided decoding (Wang et al., 2018) improves ro-bustness by validating generated queries against database constraints during generation. These approaches highlight the importance of struc-tural grounding when generating executable SQL. Retrieval-based prompting has also emerged as an effective strategy for improving LLM reasoning. In-context example selection significantly affects downstream generation quality (Liu et al., 2022), and retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) (Lewis et al., 2020) shows that grounding outputs in ex-ternal memory improves reliability. Our method extends this paradigm by retrieving semantically 2.

Interface of FD -NL 2SQL , Left Table, Right Chat 

Interface with autofill                   

> Experts can accept ,modify or reject the SQL
> Approved Query getting added to
> Exemplar Bank
> Expert can modify SQL or the Query

Figure 2: FD-NL2S QL demo UI and feedback loop. Clinicians issue a natural-language query in the chat interface (right) and view executed results in the table view (left). The system shows the generated SQL, which an expert can 

accept , modify , or reject ; accepted / edited queries are saved back to the exemplar bank to improve future retrieval and synthesis (autofill supports rapid refinement). 

similar question-SQL exemplars using dense em-beddings and conditioning synthesis on predicate-aligned decompositions, rather than relying solely on flat prompt demonstrations. Within the biomedical domain, pretrained scien-tific language models such as SciBERT (Beltagy et al., 2019) have demonstrated gains on domain-specific NLP tasks. However, prior work primarily focuses on unstructured text understanding rather than structured clinical database querying. Our system bridges biomedical language understand-ing with schema-aware SQL synthesis, enabling clinician-driven, multi-constraint exploration of on-cology clinical trial databases. 

3 FD-NL2S QL 

3.1 System Architecture and Workflow 

Illustrated in Figure 1, FD-NL2S QL is an interac-tive NL2SQL assistant for oncology clinical-trial databases. The system follows a modular pipeline combining LLM-based reasoning with retrieval over an evolving exemplar bank and lightweight programmatic checks. The demo UI exposes inter-mediate artifacts, retrieved exemplars, synthesized SQL, and results to support transparent refinement and feedback-driven improvement. 

Resources. We assume a SQLite database D

with schema metadata and an exemplar bank S =

{(sj , y j )}Mj=1 of expert-approved NL2SQL pairs. We pre-compute sentence embeddings e(sj ) for all 

sj and maintain an index for fast topk retrieval. 

1) Schema grounding. Before generation, we introspect D to build a schema dictionary (tables, columns, types, and join keys). This schema con-text is injected into prompts and used for post-generation validation (e.g., column existence and join feasibility). 

2) Decomposition-retrieval. Given a user ques-tion x, an LLM produces a schema-aligned, WHERE -oriented decomposition X (x) = {x1, . . . , x n}

where each xi targets one atomic predicate (col-umn, operator, value). For each xi, we re-trieve the top-kr nearest exemplars from S us-ing cosine similarity in embedding space, storing 

(sj , y j , score( xi, s j )) . To reduce prompt noise, we additionally extract a compact WHERE -pattern hint from each retrieved SQL when available. 33) Retrieval-guided SQL synthesis & execution. 

A second LLM synthesizes the final SQL ˆy con-ditioned on (i) x, (ii) X (x), and (iii) the retrieved exemplar bundles {(xi, Ni)}ni=1 . The model is in-structed to use retrieved SQL as structural tem-plates while satisfying all constraints in x and avoiding irrelevant literal copying. We parse the output into a single executable SELECT / WITH state-ment, apply lightweight guards (read-only policy, schema checks, timeout), and execute ˆy against SQLite to render results in the UI. 

3.2 Feedback and Exemplar Bank Expansion 4) Expert approval. The Figure 2 interface al-lows users to edit generated SQL. If an expert ap-proves the corrected query y⋆ for question x, the pair (x, y ⋆) is appended to the exemplar bank S

and embedded for future retrieval. 

5) SQL augmentation for bank growth. To ex-pand exemplar coverage with minimal manual an-notation, FD-NL2S QL augments approved queries in two sub-steps: a) Logic-based SQL mutation. Starting from an approved query y⋆, we apply exactly one atomic transformation, such as (i) operator change ( = → >= , LIKE , etc.), (ii) column sub-stitution within a compatible type group, or (iii) controlled value edits (e.g., year thresh-olds). The mutated query ˜y is retained only if it executes successfully and returns a non-empty result on D; otherwise it is discarded. b) NL Back-Translation For each retained ˜y, a separate LLM generates (i) a natural-language question ˜x consistent with ˜y and (ii) predicate-level sub-questions X (˜ x) aligned with the mu-tated constraints. The resulting pair (˜ x, ˜y)

(and optional decomposition) is added back to 

S, improving retrieval and synthesis coverage over time. 

4 Experimental Setup 

4.1 Dataset Construction Seed set. We start with 500 seed questions au-thored by a Mayo Clinic oncology scientist to reflect realistic evidence-review queries over the IOTOX 1 table (e.g., cancer type, class of ICI, trial phase, endpoints / follow-up, temporal filters). Each question is paired with a gold SQLite query, 

> 1https://iotox.living-evidence.com/

verified by execution, and stored as JSON (ques-tion, SQL, optional metadata). The seed set serves as (i) the initial exemplar bank for retrieval and (ii) the pool for few-shot demonstrations. 

Programmatic benchmark expansion. To eval-uate generalization beyond the seed distribution, we create benchmark by applying a single atomic transformation to each seed pair (x, y ) : (˜ x, ˜y) = 

T (x, y ). where T edits either the projection (SELECT ) or constraints ( WHERE ) while preserving the overall query intent. We generate the following variant types (counts in parentheses): 1) Projection edits: keep only 2 selected columns (275); drop one selected column (238). 2) Predicate dropping: 

drop one WHERE condition (179); keep only one 

WHERE condition (115); drop 2 WHERE conditions (99); remove WHERE entirely (20). 3) Value edits: 

swap a text equality value (40); relax a numeric threshold (34). 

Validity filtering and de-duplication. Each gen-erated SQL ˜y is executed against SQLite. We retain a variant only if it (i) is read-only ( SELECT /WITH ), (ii) executes without error, and (iii) returns a non-empty result. We then normalize and de-duplicate SQL to remove repeats. Finally, we use an open-source LLM Gemma3-27B-it (Gemma, 2025) to generate natural-language query using Prompt A for each augmented SQL. This constituted to 1500 NL2SQL samples & authors of this paper verified its correctness. 

4.2 Baselines and Benchmark Settings 

We compare FD-NL2S QL against four representa-tive NL2SQL baselines: 1) zero-shot, 2) few-shot, 3) Chain-of-Thoughts, using both open-source and closed source LLMs ( Gemma3-27B-it (Gemma, 2025), Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct-2507 (Qwen, 2025), and gpt-5-nano/mini (GPT-5, 2025)) and 4) SQL-R1-14B (MA et al., 2025) finetuned rea-soning based model trained with reinforcement-learning objectives. We use deterministic de-coding where supported (e.g., temperature 0.0). All prompts of baselines (Prompt C, Prompt B, Prompt D) and our method (Prompt E, Prompt F) are given in Appendix A. 

4.3 Evaluation Metrics 

We report execution-based correctness on the same SQLite database, plus lightweight structural / text scores. Specifically, we compute: (i) eEM (ex-act match of predicted vs. gold result multisets af-4ter column alignment and value canonicalization), (ii) eF1 (soft row-overlap F1 after one-to-one row matching with numeric tolerance and token overlap for strings), (iii) CHR F (computed on the matched (row-aligned) predicted vs. gold result strings) (iv) AST 2 (clause-weighted token-F1 over SELECT 

/ FROM / WHERE with weights (ws, w w, w f ) =(0 .5, 0.4, 0.1) when parsing succeeds), (v) LLM 

Conf from structured_logprobs 3 over the gen-erated SQL tokens, and We additionally log diag-nostic flags for non-read-only SQL, multiple state-ments, and LIMIT without ORDER BY .

5 Results and Discussions 

In this section, we evaluate the performance of FD-NL2SQL and analyze its behavior across re-alistic oncology clinical trial queries. We report quantitative results on execution-based metrics and examine how decomposition, retrieval grounding, and feedback-driven augmentation contribute to robustness and continuous improvement. We fur-ther discuss practical implications and observed limitations in clinician-facing usage. 

RQ1: Why does FD-NL2S QL perform better? 

Table 1 shows that FD-NL2S QL consistently im-proves execution-based correctness over standard prompting (zero-shot, few-shot, CoT) across all backbone models, with the largest gains for back-bones such as Qwen3 and gpt-5-nano . The gains are reflected across complementary metrics: eEM 

increases when the predicted query returns the ex-act gold result set; eF1 increases when partial correctness improves (e.g., more constraints are satisfied even if not all); and higher AST indi-cates the generated SQL follows the gold struc-ture more closely, reducing schema / logic drift. This translates into stronger HM scores, indicating that FD-NL2S QL improves not just one metric but the overall balance of correctness, structure, and confidence. Prompting-only baselines are brittle for multi-constraint clinical questions: zero-shot frequently drops predicates or selects incompatible columns, few-shot remains sensitive to which demonstra-tions are shown, and CoT often degrades execu-tion by introducing extra noise and incorrect in-termediate assumptions that leak into the final SQL. The reasoning-finetuned baseline SQL-R1 per-forms particularly poorly in our setting, which we 

> 2sqlglot
> 3structured-logprobs

Table 1: Quantitative results across prompting strate-gies, finetuned model and FD-NL2S QL (Ours). We report CHR F, eEM, eF1, AST, and Conf; HM denotes the harmonic mean of {Conf, eF1, eEM}. Green marks the best score within a given strategy for each model ,red marks the worst score within that strategy for each model, and underlines denote the best score overall across all models and strategies for a metric. Note 

gpt-5n depicts nano , and gpt-5m for mini variant                                                                

> Strategy Models CHR FeEM eF1 AST Conf HM
> Zero-Shot
> Qwen3 81.82 26.90 46.51 72.54 39.01 51.58
> Gemma3 84.07 29.48 39.95 59.41 65.69 49.95
> SQL-R1 63.78 03.32 01.75 41.78 10.39 00.42
> gpt-5n 89.13 11.60 18.87 52.58 ––
> gpt-5m 94.64 38.33 47.36 51.21 ––Few-Shot
> Qwen3 83.02 25.60 52.95 80.43 34.70 53.15
> Gemma3 91.32 30.85 45.72 85.47 53.16 56.80
> gpt-5n 89.58 15.80 31.97 75.53 ––
> gpt-5m 94.52 31.27 46.85 83.03 ––CoT
> Qwen3 77.96 21.65 29.73 85.21 00.00 00.00
> Gemma3 77.89 13.47 34.88 00.00 00.25 00.18
> SQL-R1 50.24 02.85 03.35 49.15 01.69 00.15
> gpt-5n 86.93 13.67 33.47 77.56 ––
> gpt-5m 86.28 10.33 19.87 82.02 ––Ours
> Qwen3 92.02 40.93 55.57 86.36 66.30 66.06
> Gemma3 92.62 32.60 44.48 86.21 70.48 57.88
> gpt-5n 90.89 32.53 50.25 86.32 ––
> gpt-5m 92.68 39.20 55.85 87.14 ––

attribute to domain/schema mismatch: oncology trial tables use domain-specific fields and nam-ing conventions, so plausible-but-ungrounded SQL (guessed columns, joins, or values) can parse yet ex-ecute to the wrong results. FD-NL2S QL addresses these failure modes by enforcing schema-aligned predicate decomposition (reducing omission) and 

in-domain exemplar grounding (retrieved expert-approved templates), which together stabilize gen-eration and improve both execution and structure. 

RQ2: Why such tool is necessary in medical do-main? Clinical evidence review workflows rou-tinely involve exploratory, ad-hoc querying over structured trial attributes (e.g., cancer type, check-point inhibitors, endpoint, follow-up windows, in-clusion criteria). However, operationalizing these questions against a database requires SQL profi-ciency and detailed schema familiarity; an unrealis-tic expectation for clinicians & researchers operat-ing under time constraints. Baseline results shows that “just prompt an LLM” is not a dependable substitute: even strong general models can pro-duce SQL that is partially correct (moderate CHR F/ eF1) but fails exact execution (lower eEM), which 5is problematic when decisions depend on precise filtering and reproducible counts. Moreover, clin-ical trial databases evolve: columns change, new values appear, and conventions shift, making static prompt templates and one-off engineering brittle. This motivates a system that reduces the expertise barrier while remaining robust to schema complex-ity and domain-specific terminology. 

RQ3: What is the practical utility of FD-NL2S QL beyond leaderboard? The primary objective is executable SQL , which is inherently reproducible, and auditable properties that matter in medical workflows more than a natural-language answer alone. The system’s trace (decomposition 

→ retrieved exemplars → synthesized SQL → re-sults) supports interactive refinement: users can see which constraints were extracted, which prior ex-emplars influenced the query, and what exactly will be executed. This directly addresses common clini-cian needs such as “tighten this criterion,” “drop this filter,” or “change the endpoint window,” with-out requiring users to learn schema details from scratch. The results table also suggests an im-portant practical pattern: FD-NL2S QL narrows performance gaps between backbones, enabling smaller/cheaper models to approach the reliability of larger models when paired with decomposition and exemplar guidance. In deployed settings, this can translate into lower latency and cost while pre-serving usability. 

RQ4: How does FD-NL2S QL improve relia-bility and trust? Reliability in medical-domain NL2SQL is not only about average accuracy, but about avoiding silent failures and enabling verifi-cation. We therefore emphasize execution-based metrics (eEM / eF1) and structural checks (AST-Sim), and we log diagnostic flags for unsafe/non-read-only SQL, multiple statements, and LIMIT 

without ORDER BY . These safeguards reduce the chance that a model output is executed in an un-safe or misleading way. In addition, we report 

LLM confidence , which provides a likelihood sig-nal that can be used to triage queries for review (e.g., low-confidence generations may warrant user confirmation or stronger retrieval evidence). Fi-nally, the feedback loop makes the system more de-pendable over time: expert-approved SQL is added to the exemplar bank, and single-step SQL muta-tions are retained only if they execute and return non-empty results before being back-translated into new NL2SQL exemplars. This combination of human approval, database-grounded filtering, and transparent intermediate artifacts supports a “living” assistant that can adapt to evolving clinical trials while remaining inspectable and reproducible. 

6 Conclusion 

We presented FD-NL2S QL , a feedback-driven clinical NL2SQL demo system for oncology trial databases that couples schema-aligned predicate de-composition with exemplar-guided SQL synthesis. Across multiple backbone models, FD-NL2S QL 

improves execution-based correctness and struc-tural fidelity over standard prompting, demonstrat-ing that retrieval grounding and constraint-level decomposition are more reliable than prompting alone for multi-constraint clinical queries. Beyond accuracy, the system is designed for real evidence-review workflows: it produces executable, au-ditable SQL; exposes an interpretable trace (decom-position, retrieved exemplars, final query, results); and supports expert-in-the-loop refinement. Finally, FD-NL2S QL continuously improves with use by incorporating approved queries and by safely ex-panding its exemplar bank via single-step SQL mu-tations validated and LLM back-translation. To-gether, this enables a practical “living” assistant that lowers the barrier to structured trial exploration while maintaining transparency and reproducibility required in the medical domain. 

Acknowledgment 

This research was supported by the Mayo Clinic and Arizona State University Alliance for Health Care Collaborative Research Seed Grant Pro-gram (Award ID: AWD00041508; Sponsor Award ID: ARI-358187) for the project: ‘Artificial intelligence-assisted digital, living, interactive clin-ical practice guidelines for cancer providers and patients.’ 

Limitations 

Our benchmark is derived from 500 expert-authored seed questions with controlled single-edit variants (projection/WHERE/value edits), which enables targeted stress testing but may not cap-ture the full diversity of real clinician queries (e.g., complex joins, nested SQL, richer aggregations, or broader linguistic variation) and can introduce distributional biases toward simplified edits. Our exemplar expansion retains only augmented SQL that executes and returns non-empty results, which 6may over-represent frequent conditions and under-cover rare cancers or edge-case endpoints; more-over, the augmentation operators are intentionally lightweight (single atomic mutations), limiting au-tomatic generation of more complex query patterns. Finally, confidence via structured_logprobs is not uniformly available across model APIs, and we evaluate offline SQL correctness without prospec-tive user studies or formal deployment privacy / security assessments. 

Ethics Statement 

FD-NL2SQL is designed to support clinician-facing exploration of oncology clinical trial repos-itories for research and evidence review, not for patient-specific diagnosis or treatment decisions. The system operates on publicly available Mayo Clinic clinical trial data and a SQLite represen-tation derived from it. The dataset contains no patient-level records, protected health information (PHI), or personally identifiable information (PII). Seed questions used to initialize the exemplar bank were authored by Mayo Clinic collaborators to re-flect realistic clinical information needs and contain no sensitive data. Because large language models may generate incorrect or incomplete SQL, the system prioritizes transparency and safety: it outputs executable, au-ditable SQL rather than free-form text, exposes intermediate reasoning steps (decomposition, re-trieved exemplars, and synthesized query), and enforces lightweight execution safeguards includ-ing read-only query constraints, schema validation, and timeout checks. The system incorporates a feedback-driven update mechanism in which only expert-approved SQL edits are added to the exem-plar bank, reducing the risk of quality degradation. Automatic SQL augmentation retains variants only if they execute successfully and return non-empty results, though this may bias coverage toward more frequent query patterns. While the underlying data is public and non-identifiable, any future institutional deployment should include access controls, audit logging, and safeguards discouraging the entry of sensitive infor-mation into free-text interfaces. The system is in-tended to augment, not replace, expert clinical judg-ment. Portions of the manuscript text were edited and polished with the assistance of AI-based lan-guage tools, with all technical content and claims reviewed and validated by the authors. 

References 

Iz Beltagy, Kyle Lo, and Arman Cohan. 2019. SciB-ERT: A pretrained language model for scientific text. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natural Lan-guage Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3615– 3620, Hong Kong, China. Association for Computa-tional Linguistics. Tom Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared D Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter, and 12 others. 2020. Language models are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 1877–1901. Curran Associates, Inc. Hsinchun Chen, Roger H. L. Chiang, and Veda C. Storey. 2012. Business intelligence and analytics: From big data to big impact. MIS quarterly , 36(4):1165–1188. Team Gemma. 2025. Gemma 3. Team GPT-5. 2025. Openai gpt-5 system card. Preprint ,arXiv:2601.03267. Patrick Lewis, Ethan Perez, Aleksandra Piktus, Fabio Petroni, Vladimir Karpukhin, Naman Goyal, Hein-rich Küttler, Mike Lewis, Wen-tau Yih, Tim Rock-täschel, Sebastian Riedel, and Douwe Kiela. 2020. Retrieval-augmented generation for knowledge-intensive nlp tasks. In Advances in Neural Infor-mation Processing Systems , volume 33, pages 9459– 9474. Curran Associates, Inc. Jiachang Liu, Dinghan Shen, Yizhe Zhang, Bill Dolan, Lawrence Carin, and Weizhu Chen. 2022. What makes good in-context examples for GPT-3? In 

Proceedings of Deep Learning Inside Out (DeeLIO 2022): The 3rd Workshop on Knowledge Extrac-tion and Integration for Deep Learning Architectures ,pages 100–114, Dublin, Ireland and Online. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Peixian MA, Xialie Zhuang, Chengjin Xu, Xuhui Jiang, Ran Chen, and Jian Guo. 2025. SQL-r1: Training natural language to SQL reasoning model by rein-forcement learning. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Con-ference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Mohammadreza Pourreza and Davood Rafiei. 2023. Din-sql: decomposed in-context learning of text-to-sql with self-correction. In Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural Information Pro-cessing Systems , NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY, USA. Curran Associates Inc. Team Qwen. 2025. Qwen3 Technical Report. Preprint ,arXiv:2505.09388. 

7Nils Reimers and Iryna Gurevych. 2019. Sentence-BERT: Sentence embeddings using Siamese BERT-networks. In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and the 9th International Joint Conference on Natu-ral Language Processing (EMNLP-IJCNLP) , pages 3982–3992, Hong Kong, China. Association for Com-putational Linguistics. Torsten Scholak, Nathan Schucher, and Dzmitry Bah-danau. 2021. PICARD: Parsing incrementally for constrained auto-regressive decoding from language models. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing ,pages 9895–9901, Online and Punta Cana, Domini-can Republic. Association for Computational Lin-guistics. Bailin Wang, Richard Shin, Xiaodong Liu, Oleksandr Polozov, and Matthew Richardson. 2020. RAT-SQL: Relation-aware schema encoding and linking for text-to-SQL parsers. In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics , pages 7567–7578, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics. Chenglong Wang, Kedar Tatwawadi, Marc Brockschmidt, Po-Sen Huang, Yi Mao, Olek-sandr Polozov, and Rishabh Singh. 2018. Robust text-to-sql generation with execution-guided decoding. Preprint , arXiv:1807.03100. Tao Yu, Rui Zhang, Kai Yang, Michihiro Yasunaga, Dongxu Wang, Zifan Li, James Ma, Irene Li, Qingn-ing Yao, Shanelle Roman, Zilin Zhang, and Dragomir Radev. 2018. Spider: A large-scale human-labeled dataset for complex and cross-domain semantic pars-ing and text-to-SQL task. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing , pages 3911–3921, Brussels, Bel-gium. Association for Computational Linguistics. Deborah A Zarin, Tony Tse, Rebecca J Williams, Robert M Califf, and Nicholas C Ide. 2011. The clinicaltrials.gov results database — update and key issues. The New England journal of medicine ,364(9):852–860. Victor Zhong, Caiming Xiong, and Richard Socher. 2017. Seq2sql: Generating structured queries from natural language using reinforcement learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:1709.00103. 

A Prompts Details 

8Prompt A: SQL-2-NL 

Read the original question, then rewrite the following SQL to a question to sound naturally what a clinician would ask while 

,→ keeping intent exactly the same as the SQL. Rules: - Output ONLY one natural-language question on one line. - Do not mention SQL, table names, databases, or column names. - Preserve every filter / constraint implied by the SQL (entities, values, thresholds, years, etc.). - Do not add new constraints and do not remove any constraints. - Keep clinical-trial wording natural and concise. - Do NOT use markdown, code fences, lables, or backticks. - Keep explicit numbers exactly as digits (example: 3, 2018). - Prefer explicit disease and treatment names rather than abbreviations. Original question: {original_question} Ground-truth SQL: {sql_text} {hint_block} 

Prompt B: Few-Shot NL2SQL 

<USER>QUESTION: Show bladder PD-L1 trials conducted in 2018 or later.</USER> <ASSISTANT> RESPONSE: SELECT "NCT", "Author", "Year", "Originial publication or Follow-up", "Class of ICI", "Cancer type", " 

,→ Trial phase" FROM clinical-trials WHERE "Cancer type" = 'Bladder ' AND "Class of ICI" = 'PD-L1 ' AND "Year" >= 2018;</ 

,→ ASSISTANT> <USER> QUESTION: Find renal cell trials of nivolumab given in combination therapy.</USER> <ASSISTANT> RESPONSE SELECT "NCT", "Author", "Year", "Originial publication or Follow-up", "Name of ICI", "Monotherapy/ 

,→ combination", "Cancer type", "Type of combination", "Trial phase" FROM clinical-trials WHERE "Cancer type" = 'Renal 

,→ cell ' AND "Name of ICI" = 'Nivolumab ' AND "Monotherapy/combination" = 'Combination ';</ASSISTANT> <USER> QUESTION: Which melanoma trials used vaccine as the control arm?</USER> <ASSISTANT> RESPONSE: SELECT "NCT", "Author", "Year", "Originial publication or Follow-up", "Control arm", "Cancer type", " 

,→ Control regimen", "Trial phase" FROM clinical-trials WHERE "Cancer type" = 'Melanoma ' AND "Control arm" = 'Vaccine 

,→ ';</ASSISTANT> <USER> QUESTION: List head and neck trials requiring a biomarker other than PD-L1 for inclusion.</USER> <ASSISTANT> RESPONSE: SELECT "NCT", "Author", "Year", "Originial publication or Follow-up", "Is any other biomarker used for 

,→ inclusion", "Cancer type", "Primary endpoint" FROM clinical-trials WHERE "Cancer type" = 'Head and Neck ' AND "Is any 

,→ other biomarker used for inclusion" = 'Yes ';</ASSISTANT> {Zero-Shot Prompt} 

Prompt C: Zero-Shot SQL2NL 

You are an expert natural language to SQL generator. The task is to query cancer drug trial studies from the "clinical-trials" table. Rules: - Output only the SQL query (no prose, no markdown, no code fences). - The SQL MUST start with SELECT. - Use only columns from this table schema: {SCHEMA} - Put double quotes around EVERY column name exactly as in the schema. - Use single quotes for string literals. Column definitions and data guidance from the schema: - "NCT" (TEXT): trial identifier string, e.g., 'NCT02477826 ', 'NCT00094653 ', 'NCT00527735 '.- "PubMed ID" (TEXT/ID-like): publication identifier, e.g., '31562796 ', '32201234 ', '20525992 '.- "Trial name" (TEXT): trial label, e.g., 'Checkmate 227 ', 'CASPIAN ', 'KEYNOTE-002 '.- ..... - "Included in MA" (TEXT): 'Yes ' or 'No '.Question: {QUESTION} Generate SQL: 

9Prompt D: Chain of Thoughts NL2SQL 

You are an expert natural language to SQL generator. The task is to query cancer drug trial studies from the "clinical-trials" table. You MUST follow the reasoning scaffold below and SHOW your work. Use only columns from this table schema: {SCHEMA} STRICT OUTPUT FORMAT: - Wrap the user question in: <USER>...</USER> - Wrap the assistant output in: <ASSISTANT>...</ASSISTANT> - Inside <ASSISTANT>, output TWO tagged blocks in this exact order: 1. <THINKING>...</THINKING> 2. <SQL>...</SQL> SQL RULES (STRICT): - The SQL MUST start with SELECT. - Use only columns from the schema. - Put double quotes around EVERY column name exactly as in the schema. - Use single quotes for string literals. - End with a semicolon. - No extra text outside <THINKING> and <SQL>. REASONING SCAFFOLD TO SHOW (do not skip steps, keep numbering): <THINKING> 1. Normalize terms: Rewrite entities to match schema values (title case for categorical values). 2. Identify intent: State the user intent in one sentence (list/filter trials, etc.). 3. Map to columns: List each extracted constraint and the exact schema column it maps to. 4. Choose constraints: Specify operators (=, >=, IN, LIKE) and how constraints combine (AND/OR). 5. Compose query: - List the selected output columns and justify briefly (key identifiers + question-relevant fields). - Then write the final SQL in <SQL>. </THINKING> GOOD EXAMPLE (CORRECT SCHEMA USE): ....... BAD EXAMPLE (INCORRECT / WHAT NOT TO DO): ...... Now, answer the following. <USER>QUESTION: {QUESTION}</USER> <ASSISTANT> <THINKING> </THINKING> <SQL> </SQL> </ASSISTANT> 

10 Prompt E: SQL Query Decomposition 

You are an expert SQL query decomposition assistant for the clinical-trials table. Schema: {SCHEMA} Question: {QUESTION} Task: Decompose the question into atomic, retrieval-friendly sub-questions that map to SQL WHERE predicates. Each sub-question should represent exactly one filter condition (column, operator, value). Preserve all key constraints exactly (e.g., cancer type, number of arms, trial phase, control arm, drug name). WHERE-focused decomposition rules: - Focus on data points that belong in WHERE conditions. - Use explicit operators when implied: =, >=, <=, >, <, !=, LIKE/contains. - Keep literal values explicit (for example: 'Colorectal ', >= 3, 'Phase 3 '). - If a question has multiple constraints, split into one sub-question per constraint. - Avoid SELECT/projection/output-only instructions (for example: "show NCT and Author"). Output Rules: - Do NOT output SQL. - Do NOT output markdown or code fences. - Do NOT add explanations. - Output ONLY valid JSON in this exact schema: {"decomposed_queries": ["...", "..."]} Good decomposition example: Original question: Which colorectal trials had 3 or more arms and used a multikinase inhibitor as a control? Output:{"decomposed_queries": [ "Which trials have Cancer type = 'Colorectal '?", "Which trials have Number of arms >= 3?", "Which trials have Control arm = 'Multikinase inhibitor '?"]} Bad decomposition example: Original question: Which colorectal trials had 3 or more arms and used a multikinase inhibitor as a control? Bad output: {"decomposed_queries": [ "Find relevant colorectal studies.", "Get trials with enough arms.", "Show NCT and Author."]} Why bad: - Too vague and not directly aligned to schema WHERE fields. - Drops exact operators/literals required for retrieval. - Includes SELECT-style output instruction instead of a filter condition. 

11 Prompt F: Final SQL Synthesizer 

You are an expert natural language to SQL generator. The task is to query cancer drug trial studies from the "clinical-trials 

,→ " table. Output rules: only the SQL query (no prose, no markdown, no code fences). Core rules: - The SQL MUST start with SELECT. - Use only columns from this table schema: {SCHEMA} - Put double quotes around EVERY column name exactly as in the schema. - Use single quotes for string literals. - Do not invent columns, values, joins, or predicates not supported by the input evidence. Evidence priority (highest to lowest): 1) Parent question intent and constraints. 2) Decomposed sub-question predicates. 3) Retrieved seed SQL examples (hints only). Predicate budget rule: - The final WHERE clause must include only intent-supported predicates from parent question + decomposition. - Do not add extra predicates from retrieved seeds. - If decomposition has N independent constraints, final WHERE should represent those N constraints unless one is 

,→ contradictory or duplicate. Synthesis constraints: - Include a WHERE predicate only if it is clearly supported by parent question/decomposition. - Do NOT copy unrelated literals from retrieved examples. - Prefer canonical dataset values when available in retrieved examples (e.g., 'Renal cell ' over free-form variants). - If input says PD1/PD-L1/CTLA-4 class, map to "Class of ICI" (not "Name of ICI"). - If input names a specific drug (e.g., Nivolumab, Pembrolizumab), map to "Name of ICI". - Distinguish biomarker fields: - "Is PD-L1 positivity inclusion criteria" - "Is any other biomarker used for inclusion" - Distinguish combination fields: - "Type of combination" when question asks chemo/anti-VEGF/vaccine type - "Monotherapy/combination" only for mono vs combination status - "Treatment regimen" only for agent/regimen names, not combination category - Avoid over-constraining: do not add extra filters beyond what is asked. Strict value policy for WHERE predicates: - For categorical columns, use ONLY values from the allowed list below. - Do not invent or paraphrase category values. - Prefer canonical literals exactly as listed. - If a user phrase is a synonym, map it using the normalization rules below. ......... Retrieved examples: Example 1 Question: Find Bladder cancer trials using PD1 where PD-L1 positivity was not an inclusion criterion. SQL: SELECT "NCT", "Author", "Year", "Original publication or Follow-up", "Class of ICI", "Cancer type", "Trial phase" FROM clinical-trials WHERE "Cancer type" = 'Bladder ' AND "Class of ICI" = 'PD1 ' AND "Is PD-L1 positivity inclusion criteria" = 'No ';....... Question: {QUESTION} Generate SQL: 

12