Title: 2603.25935v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.25935v1

Published Time: Mon, 30 Mar 2026 00:14:41 GMT

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
Dense –SwinV2: Channel -Attentive Dual -Branch CNN –Transformer Learning for Cassava Leaf Disease 

Classification 

Shah Saood 1 , Saddam Hussain Khan 2* 

> 1Artificial Intelligence Lab, Department of Computer Systems Engineering, University of Engineering and Applied
> Sciences (UEAS), Swat 19060, Pakistan
> 2Interdisciplinary Research Center for Smart Mobility and Logistics (IRC -SML), King Fahd University of Petroleum and
> Minerals (KFUPM), Dhahran 31261, Saudi Arabia.

Email:  saddam.khan@kfupm.edu.sa 

Abstract 

Cassava leaf disease is difficult to detect, since even expert agricultural visual inspections are error -prone. The 

proposed approaches for diagnosis are very time -consuming and require expert knowledge; therefore, there exists 

a need for the automation of these tasks. In this regard , this work presents a new Hybrid Dense –SwinV2, a two -

branch framework that jointly leverages densely connected convolutional features and hierarchical customized 

Swin Transformer V2 (SwinV2) representations for cassava disease classification. Th e proposed framework 

captures high -resolution local features through its DenseNet branch, preserving the fine structural cues and also 

allowing for effective gradient flow. Concurrently , the customized Swin V2 models global contextual 

dependencies through the idea of shifted -window self -attention, which enables the capture of long -range 

interactions critical in distinguishing between visually similar lesions. Moreover, an attention channel -squeeze 

module is employed for each CNN -Transformer stream independently to emphasize discriminative disease -

relat ed responses and suppress redundant or background -driven activations. Finally, the se discriminative channels 

are fused to achieve refined representations from the Dense local and SwinV2 global correlated strengthened 

feature map, respectively . The proposed Dense -SwinV2 utilized a public cassava leaf disease dataset of 31,000 

images , comprised of five diseases , including Brown Streak , Mosaic , Green Mottle , Bacterial Blight , and normal 

leaf conditions . The proposed Dense -SwinV2 demonstrates a significant classification accuracy of 98.02% with 

an F1 -score of 97.81% , outperforming well -established convolutional and transformer models. These results 

underline the fact that Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 offers robustness and practicality in the field -level diag nosis of 

cassava disease , and real -world challenges related to occlusion, noise, and complex backgrounds. 

Keyword s: Leaf Disease, Deep Learning, DenseNet, Swin Transformer, Cassava, classification 1.  Introduction 

Cassava is among the staple crops that are very important in steamy and semitropical areas, particularly in sub -

Saharan Africa, as it provides a food security safety net and supports rural livelihoods [1] . Cassava resists poor 

soils and drought conditions; hence, it remains a vital crop for over ten million smallholder farmers growing it 

for both food and cash [1] . Worldwide production stands at over 324 million to nnes , with the African continent 

contributing the largest share [2] . Despite this hardy nature against bad weather conditions, its cultivation faces a

serious menace from viral and bacterial pathogens [2], [3] . The most devastating diseases include Cassava Mosaic 

Disease (CMD) and Cassava Brown Streak Disease (CBSD) , diseases that reduce crops by more than 35% and 

result in combined annual losses of over one billion USD in the affected economies [4], [5] . This calls for timely 

and efficient disease diagnosis to assure a sustainable level of productivity , hence livelihood [6] .

Accurate identification of cassava diseases within precision crop management is an important factor impacting 

the efficiency of crop production and food security. Traditional diagnosis for many diseases relies on field physical 

inspections or manual analysis by experienced experts or farmers , which is always time -consuming, costly, and 

sometimes inapplicable in resource -poor areas. Moreover, manual analysis is inefficient, especially for large 

covering regions , and not practical for farmers with minimal means and regions that can be considered remote in 

terms of geographical location [7] .

As a countermeasure, research and development on precision agriculture systems have begun to integrate the use 

of unmanned aerial vehicles ( UAVs ) technology for crop surveillance over a large area. The UAV technology 

equipped with very efficient imaging technology , like RGB cameras, multi -spectral cameras, and thermal imaging 

cameras , can detect initial symptoms of diseases beyond human observation and implement treatments [8], [9] .

However, imaging data captured through the usage of UAV technology also poses new challenges for processing 

the images for automated analysis purposes. Therefore, the agricultural vision community has increasingly opted 

for deep learning (DL) as one of the most promising alternatives for the automation of plant disease 

identification [10], [11], [12] .

DL has played an important role in diverse fields, including automatic agriculture production and disease 

detection, medical diagnosis, NLP, security, commerce, etc [13], [14] . Deep convolutional neural networks 

(CNNs) are a subtype of DL CNNs that capture automatically hierarchical local features and are effectively 

employed in agriculture, especially for plant and leaf disease diagnosis [15] . Deep CNNs identify patterns on 

several visual levels, such as the texture and pigments on plant leaves , up to distinctive lesion formations. 

Moreover, Vision Transformer (ViT) has the ability to learn long -range contextual dependencies and achieved 

optimal performance [16], [17] . The Transformer is suitable for high -resolution UAV imagery due to its 

hierarchical design for global contextual feature extraction and integration with shifted -window attention [18] .However, the standard transformer various varients models require a stack of computational resources and 

significant volumes of data for training, rendering deployment on mobile or edge devices impractical. Mor eo ver, 

several techniques have been developed; however, they lack robustness pertaining to real -world complications, 

like face occlusions of leaves , complex backgrounds, morphological variability, and issues with computational 

load . All of these modules are parallelized to achieve enhanced discriminab ility of visually similar disease 

phenotypes while maintaining the operational feasibility for their deployment under field environments [1], [19], 

[20] . Figure 1 represents a detailed diagram of the entire framework of the proposed method of cassava leaf 

disease diagnosis, which includes a detailed description of how an input image is processed through a series of 

steps to arrive at a final classification of a disease out of a total of five types of diseases affecting cassava leaves. 

As can be seen in Figure 1, input images of cassava leaves are first subjected to data augmentation to increase 

their generalization capability, after which features are extrac ted through parallel DenseNet and Swin Transformer 

V2 (SwinV2) branches. 

This paper presents a hybrid architecture of a dual -branch comprising customized DenseNet and (SwinV2) blocks 

for hierarchical local feature abstraction and global contex tual details , respectively . Moreover, Feature maps of 

individual CNN and Transformer models are refined through the use of a Multi -Scale squeezing and Attention 

block to highlight disease -relevant features and suppress redundant or background information. Finally, the 

Feature Fusion Module merges both models' discriminative channels , thereb y allowing for the interactional 

enhancement between local and global cues. The contributions of this paper are: 

• A new Dual -Branch Hybrid DenseNet -SwinV2 is introduced for fine -grained local textures and long -range 

contextual dependencies learning towards robust cassava disease classification. The customized SwinV2 

block global interactions through hierarchical shif ted -window self -attention , strengthening discriminative 

disease representation. Moreover, DenseNet with residual block skip connection reduces the vanishing 

gradient effectively and improves the convergence of the framework. 

• A lightweight Multi -Scale and channel -squeezing attention mechanism is embedded within each model to 

enhance the salient disease patterns and suppress the background noise. Th e discriminative channels of each 

attention -refined Dense and SwinV2 maps are fuse d to achieve the refined diverse feature representations and 

preserve complementary local -global interactions [21] .

• The proposed Dense -SwinV2 technique has shown contemporary performance on the heterogeneous clutter 

and occluded cassava disease dataset , with a significant improvement over well -established CNN and 

Transformer models . The technique is robust in real agricultural environments and a reliable framework for 

automatic in -field diagnosis of cassava diseases under complex environmental conditions [22], [23] .The related work is introduced in Section 2; The related work is introduced in Section 2; the proposed cassava 

disease classification framework is explained in Section 3 .

2.  Related Work 

The traditional process of disease identification is carried out by actual physical observations or manual analysis 

of the expert or farmers. However, manual analysis is still widely used today and requires a significant amount of 

effort and tim e [1] . Therefore, DL based automatic high -resolution UAV imagery analysis has been employed in 

the previous studies. Pre -trained CNN architectures such as VGG19, InceptionResNetV2, DenseNet, and 

EfficientNet have achieved high validation accuracies for cassava disease classification, often above 85% [24]. It 

should be noted that despite the advantages of CNNs, they are vulnerable to overfitting. Overfitting can lead to a 

significant loss in perfor mance accuracy if the conditions in the field deviate from those i n the training set. One 

more disadvantage of CNNs is that they are not capable of extracting long -range spatial relationships. This 

capability is essential for differentiating diseases that have symptoms that are not only distant but also 

overlapping .

Recently, researchers have also explored the possibilities of using a combination of CNNs and Transformers. 

Such models have also been successful in achieving classification accuracy rates of more than 95%. However, 

some of the models require significant c omputational power and cannot be deployed in the field. Models like 

MobileNetV2 have some advantages [25] . The literature gap here is that there has not yet been any model that 

has the guarantee of the following: strong accuracy in the field conditions (in the presence of noise, occlusion, 

and complex backgrounds), computational efficiency in the edge environme nt, and the ability to combine local 

fine -grained features with contextual information [26] . Despite the guarantee of strong local feature extraction of 

CNNs and the strong global perspective of Swin Transformers (SwinT) , the parametric efficiency and the 

synergistic combination of these two models have not yet been thoroughly investigated in the context of cassava 

disease detection [20], [27] .

This work will bridge this gap by proposing a new hybrid and dual -branch network architecture that can 

incorporate DenseNet to utilize the dense local features and Swin V2 to utilize global features. This work will also 

contribute a new module called Multi -Scale Attention to refine the features of both branches , and another module 

called Feature Fusion Module to synergistically utilize local and global features. It balances accuracy, robustness, 

and computational efficiency; hence, this model presents a prac tical solution for an automated cassava disease 

diagnosis system under real -world field conditions [3], [28] . Table 1 below shows a comprehensive summary of 

existing deep learning techniques in cassava disease classification by comparing eight different studies from 

existing literature. It is clear from Table 1 that existing techniques , such as VGG19 with a maximum accuracy of 

80.27%, InceptionResNetV2 with a maximum accuracy of 87.00%, and other techniques like CNN -CA with a maximum accuracy of 75.00% in real -world challenges , are limited in performance due to overfitting and 

underfitting in training data. More recent techniques , such as MAIANet with a maximum accuracy of 95.83% 

and Attention -EfficientNet with a maximum accuracy of 96.30% , are limited in real -world challenges due to high 

computational cost and scalability issues , in real -world challenges and also in integrating fine -grained local 

features with global context information, which is addressed in our proposed model , Hybrid Dense -SwinV2.  

> Table 1: Existing study summary.

Ref.  Model  Acc . (%)  Dataset  Key Limitation(s)                                         

> Alford &Tuba
> (2024) [11] TL -VGG19 80.27% Cassava leaf image
> dataset Overfitting limits generalization.
> Singh et al. (2023)
> [12] InceptionResNetV2 87.00% Cassava disease
> dataset Insufficient training.
> Tewari & Kumari
> (2024) [5] Lightweight CNN -CA 75.00% Field images of
> cassava leaves Struggled with a real challenge .
> Zhang et al.
> (2024) [13] MAIANet (Multi -Attention) 95.83% Cassava leaf
> dataset
> High computational cost, unsuitable
> for low -supply deployment.
> Ravi et al. (2021)
> [14] Attention -EfficientNet 96.30% Cassava dataset Scalability problems due to
> incomplete dataset diversity.
> Sholihin et al.
> (2023) [15] AlexNet -SVM 90.70% Cassava leaf
> images Dataset size affects scalability.
> Sapre et al. (2023)
> [20] ANN Suboptimal Imbalanced
> cassava dataset Poor generalization ability.

3.  Methodology 

To make use of convolutional and transformer features for effective cassava disease classification, we develop a 

research work incorporating a hybrid Dense -SwinV2 model. Figure 2 is a complete architectural blueprint of the 

proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 architecture, with a great level of detail being presented for the dual -branch 

architecture. Three distinct vertical regions are identified in the figure: one for the DenseN et branch on the left 

for local feature extraction, one for the SwinV2 branch on the r ight for global feature extraction, and one for the 

Multi -Scale Attention and Feature Fusion module in the middle. The DenseNet branch makes use of dense 

connectivity, wherein the feature maps from all the preceding convolutional layers are used as input to the current layer, allowing for effective gradient flow as well as feature reuse. The SwinV2 branch makes use of hierarchical 

stages with shifted window attention, allowing the model to capture the long -range spatial dependencies in the 

images, which are very useful in discriminating between very similar disease patterns. The outputs of the 

Dense Net branch as well as the SwinV2 branch are fed into the Multi -Scale Attention Blocks, which help in 

refining the disease -relevant features while suppressing the background noi ses, followed by the Feature Fusion 

Module, which combines the features synergistically. To overcome some limitations of the dataset and make the 

system more robust, we also implement data augmentation during preprocessing. The overall architecture can be 

broken down into two parallel processing paths, one for feature extraction and another for feature enhancement 

[29] . In the DenseNet processing path, it focuses on the detailed feature extraction based on high -resolution leaf 

images, and in the SwinV2 processing path, it learns the global context information from the images using a 

shifted window self -attention mechanism, which is important for distinguishing leaf images that have a similar 

symptomatic presentation. Feature maps produced by every chann el are passed through a special attention 

mechanism and channel squeeze called Multi -Scale Attention and Channel -Squeeze while undergoing refinement 

before being fused. These features improve disease -related activations while discarding unnecessary information 

about irrelevant background detail [30] . In our assessment procedure, the performance comparison is conducted 

based on three types of models: the proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 model, the current best vision transformer 

architectures, and the recent CNN architectures. A graphical version of the ent ire procedure is explained in Figures 

1 and 2 .

3.1. Data Augmentation 

Data augmentation is one of the most important ways to increase model generalization, especially when data is 

limited. Exposing machine and deep learning models to synthetically augmented datasets makes them more robust 

and less prone to overfitting. Empirical studies on image -based classification tasks always attest that strategic 

augmentation leads to reduced e rror rates. In practice, augmentation emulates the natural variability of the real 

world, enhancing the capability of a model to identify a wide ra nge of samples. [31] Thus, the augmentation 

technique is put into practice in the cassava leaf dataset; there is a high class imbalance, especially concerning 

the Cassava Mosaic Disease class. Doing this could result in a biased model, increased false alarms, and 

deterioration in general performance. Augmentation reduces this problem by artificially increasing the minority 

classes. It allows random horizontal and vertical flips, scaling, reflection, and shearing techniques. These 

transformations increase the diversity of the d ataset without altering the pathological semantics and hence force 

the network to learn invariant features. Table 2 gives a detailed statistical description of the Cassava leaf disease 

dataset used in this research. The Cassava leaf disease dataset contains 31,179 high -resolution images, distributed 

across five class labels or disease types. The class labels are Cassava Bacterial Blight, containing 7,322 images; Cassava Brown Streak, containing 6,695 images; Cassava Green Mottle, containing 7,018 images; Healthy leaves, 

containing 6,330 images; and Cassava Mosaic Disease, containing 3,814 images. Furthermore, the table shows Swin Transformer V2 

Branch 

DenseNet Branch 

> Dense Convolutional
> Layers
> Shifted Window Self
> Attention
> Channel Squeeze
> Model
> Channel Squeeze
> Model
> Local & Globel Feature
> Fusion
> Feature Fusion

Classification Head     

> Bacterial Blight Brown Streak Green Mottle Healthy Mosaic

Input Images 

Figure 1: Graphical o verview of the Hybrid Dense --SwinV2 architecture showing dual -path feature extraction and multi -

scale fusion for cassava leaf disease classification. Data Augmentation 

SwinV2 

DenseNet Channel 

Augmented 

Channel 

Augmented 

> Spatial Attention
> Bacterial Blight  Brown Streak  Green Mottle  Healthy  Mosaic

Propsed Diagnosis 

Techniques Hybrid Dense 

SwinV 2

Cassava Leaf 

Images 

> Data Augmentation
> Training
> Dataset
> Dataset
> 80%

Cassava Leaf 

Images 

> Data Augmentation
> Validation
> Dataset

Proposed Techniques 

DenseNet 

SwinV 2

Multi Scale Attention 

Implementation of 

ViTs and SwinT 

CrossViT 

LocalViT 

TinyViT 

MobileViT 

SwinT 

Dual -ViT 

LeViT (Hybrid) 

ViTAR 

SwinV 2

Existing CNNs 

EfficientNetB 0

InceptionResNetV 2

GoogleNet 

InceptionV 3

DarkNet -53 

MobileNet V 4

VGG -16 

ResNet -18 

80% 

Training Phase 

> Bacterial
> Blight
> Brown
> Streak
> Green Mottle
> Healthy
> Mosaic

Dataset 

20% 

> Proposed Techniques
> Standard Existing CNNs
> Standard VITs

Cassava Plant Disease Dataset 

Testing Phase Figure 2: Overview of the proposed Hybrid Dense --SwinV2 cassava leaf disease diagnosis framework showing the high -

level workflow from input images to final classification. the split for the train and test sets as 81% -19%, with 25,441 images for the train set and 5,738 for the test set. 

Additionally, the table shows the standard input size as 224x224x3. This comprehensive documentation reveals 

important class imbalance charac teristics, particularly the underrepresentation of Cassava Mosaic Disease (3,814 

samples) compared to other classes, which justifies our data augmentation strategy to artificially expand minority 

classes and prevent biased model development. The dataset's substantial size and realistic class distribution, 

combined with natural variations in occlusion, background clutter, and lighting conditions, provide a challenging 

and representative benchmark for evaluating cassava disease classification under real -world field conditions. 

3.2.  Proposed Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 Architecture 

In our two -branch structure, DenseNet’s localized feature extraction and SwinV2 ’s global modeling are 

strategically integrated [32], [33] . DenseNet is comprised of D ense layers , in which every single layer has an 

approach to the feature maps of all the previous layers. This helps in the reuse of the features and solves the 

gradient vanishing problem. In the structure of the transformer branch, the image patches are processed usi ng 

Swin layers with alternating patterns of window attention and shifted window attention in order to effectively 

capture the long -range dependencies. Figure 3 shows a detailed visualization of the SwinV2 branch archite cture, 

which comprises four hierarchical stages with {2, 2, 6, 2} layer configurations for each Swin Transformer module. 

It is clear from Figure 3 above that the processing pipeline starts with a Patch Partition module that takes input 

images of size H x W x 3 and partitions them into non -overlapping patches of 4 x 4 and then transforms them into 

a feature dimension of 48 and a transformed resolution of H/ 4 x W/4. A Linear Embedding layer subsequently 

projects the channel dimension to a predefined size C, yielding an initial feature map of dimensions 

H/4×W/4×C.The following figure illustrates the process through these four stages: Stage 1, where 2 Swin 

Tran sformer blocks operate at the same resolution, Stage 2 where Patch Merging is used to reduce spatial 

resolution by half while increasing channels to 2C, Stage 3 where there are 6 blocks with a reduced spatial 

resolution of H/16 × W/16 × 4C, and Stage 4 whe re there are 2 blocks with a spatial resolution of H/32 × W/32 × 

8C. 

Each Swin Transformer layer is shown with its internal structure, where there is Layer Normalization, Window -

based Multi -Head Self -Attention (W -MSA) or Shifted Window -based Multi -Head Self -Attention (SW -MSA), 

and Multi -Layer Perceptron, all with residual c onnections. This hierarchical structure is efficient for learning 

multi -scale features, which is essential to capture both fine details of lesions and global disease patterns. This is 

achieved through thoughtfully crafted fusion modules that integrate loca l spatial information from convolutions 

with contextual information from transformers to achieve a more complete representation for classification [34], 

[35] . The architecture trades computational complexity with expressiveness, and thus, it is applicable for possible implementation in a resource -poor setting of agriculture while being able to achieve accurate diagnosis under 

different scenarios. Patch Partition & 

> Linear
> Embadding
> Dense Block &
> Transition Layer
> DenseNet Path
> Swin Transformer Path
> Swin V2 Stages
> with
> W-MSA & SW -
> MSA
> Feature Map
> Feature Map
> Multi -scale
> Feature Fusion
> Model
> Detection
> Bacteria
> Blight
> Brown
> Streak
> Green
> Mottle
> Healthy
> Mosaic

Figure 3: Overview of the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 architecture showing dual -path feature extraction and multi -scale 

fusion for cassava leaf disease classification .

3.3.  Customized SwinV2 

The transformer section develops the SwinV2 backbone with four stages to take the global contextual information 

and extended -range spatial dependent territory . Its architecture has four stages with a layer configuration of {2, 

2, 6, 2} Swin Transformer blocks, as shown in Figure 4. Each Swin Transformer block comprises two successive 

submodules. Each submodule includes an LN layer, a W -MSA mechanism, and an MLP. The second submodule 

is exactly similar to the first one , but replaces W -MSA with the SW -MSA mechanism. In addition, the Patch 

partition Combining layer operates down -sampling between stages. 

The processing starts with a Patch Partition module, first dividing the entered image of size H × W × 3 into non -

overl app ing 4 × 4 patches, whose dimensions are then flattened to yield a feature dimension of 48 (4 * 4 * 3). 

This operation = transforms the spatial resolution to H/4 × W/4. Subsequently, a Linear Entrenching layer projects 

the channel dimension to a predefined size C, yielding an initial feature map of dimensions H/4 × W/4 × C. In 

later stages (2 to 4), the down -sampling is done by the Patch Merging layer. This layer first concatenates the 

adjacent 2 × 2 patches and then uses a linear layer to reduce and expand the channel dimension. Hence, the spatial 

resolution is reduced by half at each stage, while the channel dimension increases from C through 2C, 4C, and 

8C. Patch         

> Partition
> Liner
> Embed
> 8C
> Swin
> Block
> Stage 1
> Swin
> Block
> Patch
> Marging
> ×2, C C
> H/4 ×W /
> 4×C
> Swin
> Block
> Stage 2
> Swin
> Block
> Patch
> Marging
> ×2,2C C
> H/8×W/
> 8×2C
> Swin
> Block
> Stage 3
> Swin
> Block
> H/16×W/
> 16×4C
> Patch
> Marging
> ×2,2C C
> Swin
> Block
> Stage 4
> Swin
> Block
> H/32×W/
> 32×8C
> Cassava
> Leaf Images
> Cassava Disease
> Bacterial
> Blight:2%
> Brown Spot:
> 10%
> Healthy:17%
> Green Mite:
> 6%
> Mosaic: 65%

Figure 4 : Transfer branch architecture based on a pretrained Swin Transformer, employing patch partitioning, hierarchical 

patch merging, and multi -stage Swin blocks to learn multi -scale features for final disease classification. 

3. .  Window -Based Multi -Head Self -Attention 

The attention methods , which are central to most current NLP approaches, ha ve been extended to computer vision 

tasks by performing self -attention on image patches treated as sequence elements [16], [17] . In this reformulation, 

image patches linearly embedded in a learnable weight matrix are intended onto Query (Q), Key (K), and Value 

(V) matrices. In mathematical form, the thought procedure is determined as eq . 1. This standard self -attention 

formulation, defined in Equation 1, computes relationships between all patches but scales quadratically with input 

sequence length. 

Attention 

(𝑄 , 𝐾 , 𝑉 

) = softmax 

(𝑄 𝐾 𝑇 

√𝑑 𝑘 

) 𝑉 (1)

where dk is the dimension of the key vectors. The normal self -care calculates the relationships for every patch. 

This has a computational difficulty that scale s quadratically with the size of the input sequence. The Swin 

Transformer presents the Window -based Multi -head Self -Attention (W -MHA) module for the reduction of 

computational complexity in self -attention calculations as described by Liu et al. (2021). In this transformer 

model, the image feature map is divided into nonoverlapping windows with equal f ixed sizes . Figure 5 offers a 

detailed visual comparison between regular W -MSA and Shifted (SW -MSA), which are two complementary 

components of the Swin Transformer model architecture. On the left -hand side, there is a description of W-MSA ,

where feature maps are divided into non -overlapping windows, usually of size 7x7 patches. This approach reduces 

computational complexity from quadratic to linear with respect to image size. However, this localization limits 

cross -window information flow. The right side shows SW -MSA, where wi ndow partitioning shifts by half a 

window size ( ⌊M/2 ⌋ patches), enabling information exchange between previously isolated windows through cyclic shifting and masked attention mechanisms. Alternating between W -MSA and SW -MSA in consecutive 

blocks achieves effective global context modeling without sacrificing computational efficiency. Window vs Shifted 

> Window MSA
> Shift by
> M/2,M/2
> W-MSA Regular Window
> Side by Side Compersion
> SW -MSA Regular Window
> SW -MSA:
> Enables Cross -
> Window
> Connection
> W-MSA
> Attention with in
> Fixed Windows

Key Difference 

Figure 5: Window vs. Shifted Window Multi -head Self -Attention (W -MSA/SW -MSA) .

This figure describes the fundamental attention mechanism of Swin Transformer. It compares side by side 

between W -MSA made on regular window segmentation and SW -MSA based on mov ing window separati on . The 

regular windows calculate self -attention within fixed -size local window areas, while the shifted windows (offset 

by half a window size) enable cross -window communication in every other layer. This architecture lets it describe 

distant -range territories while supporting linear computational difficulty , enabl ing its usage for high -resolution 

cassava leaf image analysis with efficiency. 

3.5.  Shifted Window -Based Multi -Head Self -Attention 

The limitation of W -MSA is that there is no interaction between windows, and this limits the receptive field of 

the representation . The Swin Transformer overcame this by combining the SW -MSA mechanism in a block that 

alternates, as depicted in Figure 5. The alternating pattern of W -MSA and SW -MSA blocks allows for hierarchical 

feature learning in the entire architecture. The operation of SW -MSA changes the configuration of the window 

partitioning by half the size of the window, creating new configurations with patches from different original 

windows. The cyclic shift operation maintains the computations in the regular window grid, while the masked 

attention operation avoids improper connections between non -adjacent patches, promoting the flow of 

information across the windows, thereby expanding the receptive field for the extraction of long -range spatial 

dependencies, which are vital for cassava disease classification. This strategy shifts the window partitioning by 

half a window size compared to the previous layer. A cyclic -shift operation can efficiently rearrange patches such 

that computation still lies within a regular window grid, as indicated in Figure 5 . To avoid attention between 

nonadjacent patches that happen to be clustered in the same window after the shifting, a covering method is used, as illustrated in Figure 5. This strategy facilitates cross -window information flow while sustaining the linear 

computational complexity of window -based attention. 

3.6.  DenseNet Architecture 

DenseNet proposes a connectivity rule that is quite different from that of conventional convolutional networks. 

Every layer is connected to all following layers in an online routine , as indicated in Figure 6. All preceding feature 

maps are taken as input in this case. This once again provides L(L+1)/2 immediate connections in a network of L 

layers, resulting in better flow of gradients as well as propagation of features in the network [36] . The basic block 

is the dense block. Every dense block is composed of various convolutional layers, each of which is supported by 

set regularization as well as ReLU. Every layer is provided with all feature maps of all basic layers in the block. 

This faci litates effective aspect reuse and helps to alleviate the vanishing gradient problem. Mathematically, for 

a dense block with an increasing rate k, there are k new feature maps in each layer. Hence, for the lth layer, there 

are k0 + k x (l - 1) input featur e maps, where k0 is the number of networks in the input to that block. For 

concatenative growth, there are some considerations to be taken care of with regard to parameters. To balance 

efficiency in the model, transition layers are used between dense block s. The basic transition layer is composed 

of a batch normalization layer, followed by a 1 x 1 convolutional layer to reduce the channel dimension, and then 

followed by a 2 x 2 average combining layer for spatial low selection. 

The value k is one of the most important hyperparameters, which determines the capacity of the network. 

Increasing k allows more new information to be added in each layer; this might improve the model's 

expressiveness , but at the cost of consuming more computational resources, thus its choice forms a trade -off 

between performance and efficiency. DenseNet [32], [37] combines all layers to make an efficient deep model. It 

is very similar to ResNet, with a few important differences. DenseNet represents a model that is constructed as 

ResNet, except that each layer is feed -forward to the next layer. Employing these feed -forward connections, the 

number of layers is multiplied from L to L(L + 1)/2 [24]. Each layer's input is the appear ance maps of all the 

earlier layers. The DenseNet has a number of advantages, including solving the loss ascent problem. DenseNet 

models, parti cularly when utilizing ImageNet pretraining, require considerable computational expenditure but 

yield substantial accuracy benefits [25, 26]. Figure 5 shows the DenseNet dense connectivity, where each layer is 

connected to all the preceding layers through channel -wise concatenation, resulting in L(L+1)/2 connections 

between the layers. In the dense blocks, the convolutional layers are used to produce k new feature maps, referred 

to as the growth rate. In the transition layers, 1×1 convolutional layers are u sed for channel reduction, while the 

2×2 average pooling operation is used for downsampling. DenseNet  

> Block FC
> Input
> Convolution
> Pooling
> DenseNet
> Block
> Convolution
> Pooling
> DenseNet
> Block
> Pooling
> LSZ 17
> Category

DenseNet Architecture Figure 6: illustrates the architectural layout of DenseNet , highlighting its dense connectivity pattern. 

3.7.  Multi -scale Attention Block 

The Multi -scale Attention Block (MAB) creates scale -aware attention maps that are capable of improving features 

obtained from both branches in the network. The MAB combines parallel multi -scale convolution filtering with 

channel attention mechanisms. This increases the disease -related activations while reducing the background noise. 

The refined output formed by the MAB is represented by the Multi -scale Attention Block (MAB) , which develops 

scale -aware attention maps that are capable of improving features obtained from both branches in the network. 

The MAB combines parallel multi -scale convolution filtering with channel attention mechanisms. This increases 

the disease -related activations whi le reducing the background noise. The refined output formed by the MAB is 

scale -aware attention maps that are capable of improving features obtained from both branches in the network. 

The MAB combines p arallel multi -scale convolution filtering with channel attention mechanisms. This increases 

the disease -related activations while reducing the background noise. The refined output formed by the MAB is 

represented .

Fd′=MAB ( Fd) (2) 

Ft′=MAB ( Ft) (3) 

As formulated in Equations 2 and 3, the MAB refines DenseNet and Transformer feature maps , respectively, 

enhancing disease -relevant patterns. Whe re ‘ Fd’ and ‘ Ft’ represent D enseNet and Transformer feature maps, while 

Fd′ and Ft′ are the refined feature maps after attention , and MAB (·) is the Multi -scale Attention Block 

Capitalizing on the progress made in the related Transformer -inspired architecture, the proposal of the block 

architecture eliminates the limitations of traditional Residual Channel Attention Networks. The newly proposed 

architecture adopts the MetaFormer paradigm to improve the ability of feature extraction . T he MAB con sist s of 

two main parts: the Multi -scale Large Kernel Attention Module and the Gated Spatial Attention Unit. Given a key feature map  X, the MAB operation . The complete mathematical formulation of the MAB operation, incorporating 

both attention modules with learnable scaling parameters, is presented in Equation 4 .

𝑁 1 = LN (𝑋 ),

𝑋 = 𝑋 + 𝜆 1 ⋅ 𝑓 3(MLKA (𝑓 1(𝑁 1)) ⊗ 𝑓 2(𝑁 1)),

𝑁 2 = LN (𝑋 ),

𝑋 = 𝑋 + 𝜆 2 ⋅ 𝑓 6(GSAU (𝑓 4(𝑁 2), 𝑓 5(𝑁 2))),

(4)

where ‘LN ’ denotes Layer Normalization and λ1,λ 2 are learnable scaling parameters. ‘MLKA ’⋅ and ‘GSAU ’⋅ are 

the new attention modules described in the sequel. ⊗ means element -wise multiplication, and each f_i ⋅ represents 

point -wise convolution that maintains feature dimensions. Compared with Batch Normalization, Layer 

Normalization preserves instance -specific statistics and brings better convergence stability. 

3.8.  Benchmark Models for Comparative Analysis 

Extensive comparative analysis has been performed for the aimed hybrid model against the selected Leading -

edge deep learning architectures. Benchmark models, selected for comparison, represent those established to 

perform best for image classification, including three different architecture paradigms . The first set of benchmarks 

consisted of CNNs, from which strong local features were needed , like ResNet and its variants , DarkNet , and the 

VGG family [38], [39], [40] . The second set of models w as Vision Transformer models, representing a kind of 

model that is very capable of capturing global dependencies by self -attention. Typical models are CrossViT, 

LocalViT, TinyViT, MobileViT, and ViTAR. A third set of hybrid architectures that combine convolutional and 

transformer mechanisms, on the other hand, provided a point of direct comparison. This set included LeViT, 

DualViT, Swin T, and SwinV2 , all of which had been designed for effective synthesis of local and global 

processing. Complete selection prov ides a substantial ground for assessing the impacts of the projected framework 

suggestions .

. Experimental Setup 

.1.  Dataset Details 

In this production , a public cassava starch leaf image dataset available on Kaggle was utilized [49]. Expert 

annotation guaranteed reliable ground -truth labels within the following five diagnostic classes [3], [41], [42] :

Cassava Bacterial Blight, Cassava Brown Spot, Cassava Green Mite, Cassava Mosaic Disease, and Healthy 

leaves. The number of images in the dataset is somewhat above 31,000, quite sufficient to represent disease 

symptoms amply but also to capture natural l eaf variability [1], [43] . The size of the dataset allow s for useful 

training and testing of hidden knowledge forms . Moreover, it introduces realistic challenges in class imbalance 

that would be seen in field -level diagnosis [6] . Additionally, in the environmental conditions, occlusion, and 

background clutter, the robustness in feature learning enhances across heterogeneous visual patterns. Finally, the fact that the dataset is public encourages reproducibility and further research in detecting cassava diseases [44] .

Figure 7 shows the representative samples of all five cassava diseases: Bacterial Blight, Brown Streak, Green 

Mottle, Mosaic Disease, and Healthy leaves. This figure represents the visual characteristics and variability of the 

dataset. Table 2 shows the distribution of the dataset. It represents the number of samples in each class and the 

81% -19% split for training and testing. The dimensions are all normalized to 224×224×3. 

Figure 7: The dataset c omprise s Cassava leaf disease .

Table 2: Summary of the cassava leaf disease dataset showing class -wise sample distribution. 

Characteristics  Samples 

Total  31179 

Bacterial Bligh  7322 

Brown Streak  6695 

Green Mottle  7018 

Healthy  6330 

Mosaic  3814 

Train (8 0%)  (25441) 

Test ( 20 %)  (5738) 

Dimension  224 x 224 x 3 

.2.  Experimental Setup Bacterial Blight Small 

> Brown Streak Small
> Green Mottle Small
> Healthy Small
> Mosaic Small

We trained the planned Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 model and all comparator architectures using the Adam optimizer 

with a primary learning rate of 1×10⁻³, an 85% drop in learning rate for every 20 epochs of training, and a weight 

decay of 0.04 that incorporated constant regularization throughout the network training. The cross -entropy loss 

function quantified the classification error and was one of the contributors toward addressing class imbalance. 

Training used a bat ch size of 16, and overfitting suppression by a failure rate of 0.3 at the classification level 

enhanced generalization. Every experiments stood implemented in Python using TensorFlow, which was executed 

in Jupyter Notebook. The used system configuration consisted of an Intel Core i9 -10th Generation and an NVIDIA 

GeForce RTX 4070 Ti GPU. 

The preprocessed Kaggle Cassava Leaf Disease Dataset was adopted with a hold -out validation strategy. 

Throughout the experiments, 20% of the data were kept for validation. This partition makes the comparisons 

uniform for all experimental runs. For the eval uation, Accuracy (Acc), Precision (Pre), Sensitivity (Sen), F1 -

score, ROC/PR curves, and their corresponding AUC values were adopted. The evaluation metrics used to assess 

model performance are formally defined in Equations 5 -8. Accuracy (Eq 5) reflects the level of correctness, 

Sensitivity (Eq 6) reflects the rate of true positive predictions, which is important in disease prediction, Precision 

(Eq 7) reflects the level of prediction reliability, and F1 -score (Eq 8) reflects the harmonic balance between 

precision and sensitivity. Particular emphasis was placed on maximizing Sensitivity given the importance of 

minimizing false negatives during cassava disease identification. The standard error for sensitivity supported the 

approxim ation of its 95 % certainty period using a z -score of 1.96 .

𝐴𝑐𝑐 = 𝑇𝑃 + 𝑇𝑁 

𝑇𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙 × 100 (5)

𝑆𝑒𝑛 = 𝑇𝑃 

𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑁 × 100 (6)

𝑃𝑟𝑒 = 𝑇𝑃 

𝑇𝑃 + 𝐹𝑃 × 100 (7)

𝐹 1 = 2 × 𝑃𝑟𝑒 × 𝑆𝑒𝑛 

𝑃𝑟𝑒 + 𝑆𝑒𝑛 (8)

5.  Results and Discussion 

The experimental evaluation of the Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 architecture was satisfactory for cassava leaf disease 

classification. Table 3 shows a detailed quantitative evaluation of the proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 

architectures against 22 state -of -the -art models. In this tabl e, Accuracy, Sensitivity, Precision, F1 -score, FLOPs, 

Inference Time, and Training Time per epoch are provided for all models. The evaluation of all models was performed using standard CNNs, Vision Transformers, and Hybrid Vision Transformers and CNNs. Extirpation 

experiments were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of each component of the models. Table 3 and Figures 

8-12 show the overall evaluation results. Meanwhile, Table 3 contains numerical performance metrics, and 

Figures 8 -12 show the visual analysis of the classification performance, discriminative ability, and class -wise 

performance of all five classes of the Cassava disease. Figure 8 contains the co mparison of the confusion matrix 

between the proposed model and the other five benchmark models, indicating that the majority of the 

misclassifications are between visually similar classes of the Cassava disease, namely Bacterial Blight and Brown 

Spot. Thi s indicates that the proposed architecture has the ability to achieve 98.0% Accuracy, which is the best 

among all the models and has further improved the baseline SwinV2 , which had attained only 96.45% Accuracy. 

In addition, this has also been well confirmed through the use of the PR -AUC of 0.9875 and ROC -AUC of 0.9893. 

This is due to the effectiveness of the DenseNet, SwinV2, and Multi -Scale Attention modules in the thre e-stream 

structure of the proposed model for improved feature programming and overview. Disorder format, which 

indicates that the majority of the incorrect classifications are between the groups of the diseases themselves. 

Visually similar classes of the C assava disease, namely Cassava Bacterial Blight and Cassava Brown Spot, have 

resulted in incorrect classifications . For example, the 98.3 0% correct identification of Cassava Mosaic Disease 

class corresponds to a 1.7% misclassification rate [42], [45] . These results point out the difficulty in distinguishing 

between fine -grained disease patterns and affirm that the proposed feature extraction and fusion mechanisms are 

indeed robust. Computational efficiency was also compared and is reported. The Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 

architecture showed lower training complexity [14], [34], [38], [39], [44], [45], [46] and faster convergence than 

other CNN, ViT, and hybrid models. This was because the succinct and efficient fusion and mutual reinforcement 

of local and global features reduce d computational overhead without reducing their accuracy. Several other hybrid 

CNN -ViT models showed oscillations in training, indicative of less stable convergence dynamics. 

Ablation studies showed that indeed , multi -scale attention contributes to improving discriminative feature 

learning. The synergy between local convolutional features and global transformer representations contributed to 

a much -improved classification performance, especially for visually similar lesion classes. Thus, the proposed 

architecture is an effective, efficient, and deployable model for practical cassava disease diagnosis in the field. Figure 8: Confusion matrices comparing the classification performance of different models across five cassava disease 

classes. 

Table 3:Quantitative comparison of proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 variants with existing CNN and Vision Transformer 

architectures on cassava disease classification. 

Model  Acc. %  Sen. %  Pre. %  F1 -score %  FLOP  Inf.T (ms)  Tim/Ep. 

EfficientNetB0  87.42  84.31  88.1  86.16  1.39  5.4  3.85 

InceptionResNetV2  88.05  89.44  84.52  86.91  13.1  12.3  6.72 

GoogleNet  91.36  90.82  88.9  89.85  1.5  6.1  5.61 

InceptionV3  92.74  92.11  91.35  91.73  5.7  10.3  5.89 

MobileNet V4  93.26  92.34  92.85  92.59  10.7  11.5  4.96 

DarkNet -53  94.38  94.01  92.95  93.47  12.6  14.8  5.52 

VGG -16  95.62  95.11  94.2  94.65  4.3  6.1  4.07 

ResNet -18  95. 44  95. 20  95. 36  95. 28  3.6  7.9  4.81 

DensNet -201  96.73  96.2  96.06  96.13  8 14.3  6.19 

Existing ViT 

CrossViT  94.12  93.04  93.66  93.35  4.5  11.2  6.16 

LocalViT  94.67  94.1  93.52  93.81  5 12  6.22 

TinyViT  95.8 6 95.33  94.48  94.9  6 12.5  6.28 

MobileViT  96.48  95.77  95.93  95.85  4.6  10.5  4.92 

SwinT  96.69  96.18  96.04  96.11  8.7  14.8  6.39 

Proposed Setup 

Customized SwinV2  97.01  96.37  96.99  96.56  9.2  16  6.85 

Proposed CA -SwinV2  97.62  97.01  97.42  97.21  11  17.5  6.52 

Proposed Dense -

SwinV2  98.02  97.61  98.01  97.81  15  19.8  9.13 

Proposed CA -Dense -

SwinV2  98.51  98.48  98.53  98.51  14.8 19.1  9.09 Figure 9: Performance gain comparisons of the proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 over Vision Transformers. 

Figure 10 : Performance gain comparisons of the proposed Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 over conventional CNNs. 

5.1.  Performance Comparison with Existing ViTs and CNNs 

Therefore, an extensive comparative study is made to assess the proposed Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 framework for 

cassava leaf disease classification against leading CNNs, VITs, and hybrid architectures on the Kaggle dataset 

and additional benchmarks. Figure 9 visualizes performance gains of our proposed model over Vision 

Transformer architectures, showing relative improvements of 2.87 -3.23% across all metrics. Figure 10 illustrates 

Minimum 

Maximum 0      

> 5
> 10
> 15
> 1234567

1.78 2.28 2.47 2.38 

6.8 

4.8 

2.9 

11.09 

14.17 

10.43 12.35 13.41 13.7 

5.24 

## Performace of proposed model over Existing CNN 

Minimum Maximum 

Minimum 

Maximum       

> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> 8
> 10
> 12
> 1234567

1.82 2.3 2.49 2.4 

6.1 

4.3 

2.7 

4.39 5.44 4.87 5.16 

10.3 

7.9 

2.93 

## Performace of proposed model over Existing ViTs 

Minimum Maximum improvements over conventional CNN architectures, demonstrating consistent gains of 3.59 -12.19% across all 

evaluation metrics. The improvements were in the range of 3.59% to 12.19% upon established CNNs that rely on 

native attribute extraction .

Performance gains relative to existing Vision Transformers, which emphasize global feature learning, were 

between 2.87% and 3.23%, while improvements over SwinT ranged from 1.72% to 2.69%, with a percentage 

increase in PR -AUC reaching from 3% to 11.8%, shown in Figure 10. The comparison table against state -of -the -

art methods on the Kaggle cassava dataset is shown in Table 3. Baseline SwinV2 models had promising results, 

improving up to 96.28% Accuracy, 95.22% Sensitivity, 96.09% Precis ion, 95.62% F1 -score, and an improvement 

of about 3% in PR -AUC. While competitive performances were achieved by LeViT and SwinV2 hybrid 

architectures, Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 has always secured the top rank in all considered metrics. The obtained 

results confirm that the synergistic fusion of DenseNet, SwinV2, and Multi -Sc ale Attention into the model’s 

design effectively integrates local and global feature representations to improve classification performance. 

5.2.  Systematic Ablation 

The proposed Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 model has been systematically compared with a wide set of Leading -edge 

representations , containing convolutional, transformer -based, and hybrid profound knowledge outlines , using the 

Kaggle and additional cassava leaf disease datasets (Table 3). Traditional CNNs like VGG, ResNet, Darknet, 

Inception family, etc., have strong inductive biases for local feature extraction. However, they have limited global 

receptive fields, which inhibit the modeling of long -range dependencies. Therefore, even the best performing 

CNN, ResNet -18, could reach only 94.77% Accuracy. Table 3 provides the complete quantitative comparison, 

showing that each progressive enhancement —from Customized SwinV2 (97.01%) to CA -SwinV2 (97.62%) to 

Dense -SwinV2 (98.02%) to CA -Dense -SwinV2 (98.51%) delivers cumulative performance gains, validating the 

contribution of each architectural component. 

Alternatively , Vision Transformers and classified thought models like CrossViT, LocalViT, TinyViT, MobileViT, 

ViTAR, and SwinV2 capture global contextual relationships with much greater power but have reduced sensitivity 

for subtle local textures. Accurate cassava leaf disease characterization requires both loca l detail and global 

context. The progressive improvements documented in Table 3 demonstrate that our dual -branch design with 

attention mechanisms successfully addresses the local -global balance chall enge, outperforming both pure CNN 

and pure transformer architectures. The Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 is based on addressing such limitations by 

synergistically integrating high -resolution local features from DenseNet along with global contextual 

representations using SwinV2 through a hybrid CNN –Transformer backbone. These improvements are visually 

confirmed in the confusion matrices (Figure 8) and performance gain charts (Figures 9 -10 ), showing consistent 

superiority across all metrics. Performance improvements also go beyond accuracy, with the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 outperforming peer architectures through understanding , accuracy , F1 -score, and PR -AUC. The results 

further indicate that the model is very robust with a superior tendency to capture variations in cassava leaf diseases 

from the local to the global scale. Additional evaluations, including the ROC and PR curves and PCA -based 

evaluation, further illustrate the advantage of the model over traditional CNNs, Vision Transformers, and hybrid 

models .

5.3.  PR/ROC Curve Analysis 

PR curves plot the discriminative capability of Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 for different decision thresholds, reflecting 

the capacity of the model to generalize across all gour cassava leaf diseases: Cassava Bacterial Blight, Cassava 

Brown Spot, Cassava Green Mite, Cassava Mosaic Disease across Healthy (Figure 11) . The curve is plotted by 

linking the guessed possibilities beside the ground -truth labels, while a n outline of its accomplishment is based 

on a 20% hold -out validation set . Good classification performanc e is achieved by the proposed model, as indicated 

by the high PR -AUC value of 0.9875 and ROC -AUC value of 0.9893 compared to all CNNs, Vision Transformers, 

and hybrid models in this paper. A good improvement is noted in the values for PR -AUC and ROC -AUC by 3 -

11.8% and 1.84%, respectively. Figure 11: Precision -Recall for benchmark model showing per -class detection rate analysis across healthy. 

The PR Curves demonstrate , for comparison with the proposed method’s Hybrid Dense -SwinV2 in relation to 

other architectures, the highest PR -AUC value of 0.9875 for the five cassava disease classes. The above displays 

that the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 version tops further techniques in PR characteristics. The intense blue ROC curve, 

while having most information facts crowded in the peak, indicates good true positive rates with minimal false 

positives. At the same time, the green PR curve has points crowded toward the top -right region, re flecting strong 

performance in precision –recall across all cassava classes. These results confirm the model’s robust ability to 

differentiate subtle inter -class variations while maintaining high diagnostic sensitivity and specificity. 

5. .  Feature Space Visualization 

Further validation of the efficacy of the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 framework was done by visualizing some feature 

maps extracted from an unseen test set. Direct interpretation is not possible because these features are high -

dimensional. The feature projection o f the pooling and fully connected layers into a two -dimensional space was 

done using PCA as part of the analysis pipeline. The use of PCA in this context owes to the fact that it is a non -

parametric method for manifold learning; hence, it preserves the loc al geometry of the features for better 

clustering and visualization. Feature embeddings were drawn from the second last totally linked layer of four 

versions , including the proposed Hybrid Dense –SwinV2, and visualized using the Kaggle Cassava Leaf Disease 

Dataset. PCA projections showing that the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 model produces more clearly separable feature 

representations across all five classes: Cassava Bacterial Blight, Cassava Brown Spot, Cassava Green Mite, 

Cassava Mosaic Disease, and Healthy. Compares the PCA embeddings of three configurations: (a) Hybrid Dense –

SwinV2 with Multi -Scale Attention, (b) Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 without Multi -Scale Attention, and (c) the LeViT 

model. Red, blue, magenta, and green colors are used to represent the data poin ts in each cl ass (Figure 12) . In the 

proposed model, wider separability of data points occurs along PC1 and PC2, reflecting higher discriminative 

ability. These observations can be justified by the improved feature encoding capabilities of the model and, in 

turn, by the better perfor mance than previous architectures. 

6.  Conclusion 

This paper proposed the Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 model to solve the persistent problems of efficiency in automatic 

cassava leaf disease diagnosis, including local fine -grained feature capturing and global contextual pattern 

capturing. This model adopts a dual -br anch structure with the combination of DenseNet, enabling high -resolution 

local feature extraction, and SwinV2 for modeling long -range dependencies. A multi -scale attention approach 

coupled with channel refinement forms one pathway that allows mutual enhan cement between these two routes by enhancing feature discriminability. On evaluation with approximately 31,000 cassava leaf images spread 

across five disease classes, it achieved the Leading -edge performance of 98.0% accuracy and an F1 -score of 

97.36%. Feature space visualizations verify that this network can generate separable, discriminative 

representations for each class. Computational analysis reveals its efficiency to be higher compared to other 

Leading -edge hybrid designs . The Hybrid Dense –SwinV2 framework is robust and highly accurate for practical 

cassava disease classification. Further research might apply this to other tasks in agricultural pathology, such as 

class imbalance, low contrast, or complex visual patterns. Extensions to either multimodal or temporal data may 

further improve its diagnostic utility in real -world applications.  

> Figure 12: Feature discrimination analysis of the proposed techniques in comparison with the existing CNN/ViTs

References :

[1] J. G. A. Barbedo, “Factors influencing the use of deep learning for plant disease recognition,” Biosyst. 

Eng. , vol. 172, pp. 84 –91, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2018.05.013. 

[2] J. Chen, J. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Sun, and Y. A. Nanehkaran, “Using deep transfer learning for image -based 

plant disease identification,” Comput. Electron. Agric. , vol. 173, p. 105393, Jun. 2020, doi: 

10.1016/j.compag.2020.105393. 

[3] J. G. A. Barbedo, “Impact of dataset size and variety on the effectiveness of deep learning and transfer 

learning for plant disease classification,” Comput. Electron. Agric. , vol. 153, pp. 46 –53, Oct. 2018, doi: 

10.1016/j.compag.2018.08.013. 

[4] S. Aboelenin, F. A. Elbasheer, M. M. Eltoukhy, W. M. El -Hady, and K. M. Hosny, “A hybrid Framework 

for plant leaf disease detection and classification using convolutional neural networks and vision 

transformer,” Complex & Intelligent Systems , vol. 11, no. 2, p. 142, Feb. 2025, doi: 10.1007/s40747 -024 -

01764 -x. 

[5] M. Arsenovic, M. Karanovic, S. Sladojevic, A. Anderla, and D. Stefanovic, “Solving Current Limitations 

of Deep Learning Based Approaches for Plant Disease Detection,” Symmetry (Basel). , vol. 11, no. 7, p. 

939, Jul. 2019, doi: 10.3390/sym11070939. 

[6] A. Dosovitskiy et al. , “An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale,” 

Jun. 2021. 

[7] S. H. Khan and R. Iqbal, “A Comprehensive Survey on Architectural Advances in Deep CNNs: Challenges, 

Applications, and Emerging Research Directions,” Mar. 2025. 

[8] S. H. and I. R. Khan, “UAV -Based Multispectral Imaging for Precision Agriculture: A Comprehensive 

Review of Plant Disease Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing , 2025. 

[9] Rashid Iqbal and S. H. Khan, “Remote Sensing Techniques for Crop Disease Surveillance: Challenges and 

Opportunities,” Comput. Electron. Agric. , 2026. 

[10] A. K. and Y. S. L. S. H. Khan, “"Benchmarking Deep Convolutional Neural Networks for Plant Disease 

Classification: A Comprehensive Analysis,” Comput. Electron. Agric. , 2025. 

[11] S. H. Khan and R. Iqbal, “"A Comprehensive Survey on Architectural Advances in Deep CNNs: 

Challenges, Applications, and Emerging Research Directions,” ACM Comput. Surv. , 2025. 

[12] J. G. A. Barbedo, “Factors influencing the use of deep learning for plant disease recognition,” Biosyst. 

Eng. , vol. 172, pp. 84 –91, Aug. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.biosystemseng.2018.05.013. 

[13] Rashid Iqbal and S. H. Khan, “A Residual and Spatial Channel Augmented CNN –Transformer Framework 

for Monkeypox Detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. , 2025. 

[14] S. H. Khan, A. Sohail, A. Khan, and Y. -S. Lee, “COVID -19 Detection in Chest X -ray Images Using a New 

Channel Boosted CNN,” Diagnostics , vol. 12, no. 2, p. 267, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.3390/diagnostics12020267. [15] S. H. and I. R. Khan, “A Comprehensive Survey on Architectural Advances in Deep CNNs: Challenges, 

Applications, and Emerging Research Directions,” ACM Comput. Surv. , 2025. 

[16] Z. Liu et al. , “Swin Transformer V2: Scaling Up Capacity and Resolution,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference 

on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , IEEE, Jun. 2022, pp. 11999 –12009. doi: 

10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01170. 

[17] Z. Liu et al. , “Swin Transformer: Hierarchical Vision Transformer using Shifted Windows,” in 2021 

IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , IEEE, Oct. 2021, pp. 9992 –10002. doi: 

10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00986. 

[18] S. H. Khan, “Vision Transformers in Agricultural Disease Detection: Architectures, Challenges, and Future 

Directions,” IEEE Transactions on AgriFood Electronics , 2025. 

[19] Rashid Iqbal and S. H. Khan, “A Residual and Spatial Channel Augmented CNN –Transformer Framework 

for Monkeypox Detection,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Top. Comput. Intell. , 2025. 

[20] S. H. Khan, “Dual -Branch Architectures for Fine -Grained Plant Disease Classification: A Comparative 

Analysis,” Plant Phenomics , 2025. 

[21] E. C. Too, L. Yujian, S. Njuki, and L. Yingchun, “A comparative study of fine -tuning deep learning models 

for plant disease identification,” Comput. Electron. Agric. , vol. 161, pp. 272 –279, Jun. 2019, doi: 

10.1016/j.compag.2018.03.032. 

[22] M. Everingham, L. Van Gool, C. K. I. Williams, J. Winn, and A. Zisserman, “The Pascal Visual Object 

Classes (VOC) Challenge,” Int. J. Comput. Vis. , vol. 88, no. 2, pp. 303 –338, Jun. 2010, doi: 

10.1007/s11263 -009 -0275 -4. 

[23] K. P. Ferentinos, “Deep learning models for plant disease detection and diagnosis,” Comput. Electron. 

Agric. , vol. 145, pp. 311 –318, Feb. 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.compag.2018.01.009. 

[24] A. Ramcharan, K. Baranowski, P. McCloskey, B. Ahmed, J. Legg, and D. P. Hughes, “Deep Learning for 

Image -Based Cassava Disease Detection,” Front. Plant Sci. , vol. 8, Oct. 2017, doi: 

10.3389/fpls.2017.01852. 

[25] C. Szegedy, V. Vanhoucke, S. Ioffe, J. Shlens, and Z. Wojna, “Rethinking the Inception Architecture for 

Computer Vision,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , IEEE, 

Jun. 2016, pp. 2818 –2826. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2016.308. 

[26] S. H. Khan and R. Iqbal, “Hybrid CNN -Transformer Architectures for Agricultural Disease Detection: A 

Systematic Review and Future Directions,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. , 2026. 

[27] H. H. Y. L. Z. Z. S. X. and B. G. Z. Liu, “Swin Transformer V2: Scaling Up Capacity and Resolution,” 

Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2022. 

[28] A. Ramcharan, K. Baranowski, P. McCloskey, B. Ahmed, J. Legg, and D. P. Hughes, “Deep Learning for 

Image -Based Cassava Disease Detection,” Front. Plant Sci. , vol. 8, Oct. 2017, doi: 

10.3389/fpls.2017.01852. [29] H. Si et al. , “A Dual -Branch Model Integrating CNN and Swin Transformer for Efficient Apple Leaf 

Disease Classification,” Agriculture , vol. 14, no. 1, p. 142, Jan. 2024, doi: 10.3390/agriculture14010142. 

[30] S. H. Khan, A. Khan, Y. S. Lee, M. Hassan, and W. K. Jeong, “Segmentation of shoulder muscle MRI using 

a new Region and Edge based Deep Auto -Encoder,” Multimed. Tools Appl. , vol. 82, no. 10, pp. 14963 –

14984, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s11042 -022 -14061 -x. 

[31] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learning,” J. Big 

Data , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 60, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1186/s40537 -019 -0197 -0. 

[32] G. Huang, Z. Liu, L. Van Der Maaten , and K. Q. Weinberger, “Densely Connected Convolutional 

Networks,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , IEEE, Jul. 

2017, pp. 2261 –2269. doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.243. 

[33] Z. Liu et al. , “Swin Transformer V2: Scaling Up Capacity and Resolution,” in 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference 

on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , IEEE, Jun. 2022, pp. 11999 –12009. doi: 

10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01170. 

[34] Z. Rauf, A. Sohail, S. H. Khan, A. Khan, J. Gwak, and M. Maqbool, “Attention -guided multi -scale deep 

object detection framework for lymphocyte analysis in IHC histological images,” Microscopy , vol. 72, no. 

1, pp. 27 –42, Feb. 2023, doi: 10.1093/jmicro/dfac051. 

[35] S. H. Khan et al. , “COVID -19 detection in chest X -ray images using deep boosted hybrid learning,” 

Comput. Biol. Med. , vol. 137, p. 104816, Oct. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.compbiomed.2021.104816. 

[36] D. Hendrycks and T. Dietterich, “Benchmarking Neural Network Robustness to Common Corruptions and 

Perturbations,” Mar. 2019. 

[37] W. Wang et al. , “Pyramid Vision Transformer: A Versatile Backbone for Dense Prediction without 

Convolutions,” in 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , IEEE, Oct. 2021, 

pp. 548 –558. doi: 10.1109/ICCV48922.2021.00061. 

[38] S. H. Khan, A. Khan, Y. S. Lee, M. Hassan, and W. K. Jeong, “Segmentation of shoulder muscle MRI using 

a new Region and Edge based Deep Auto -Encoder,” Multimed. Tools Appl. , vol. 82, no. 10, pp. 14963 –

14984, Apr. 2023, doi: 10.1007/s11042 -022 -14061 -x. 

[39] S. H. Khan and R. Iqbal, “RS -FME -SwinT: A Novel Feature Map Enhancement Framework Integrating 

Customized SwinT with Residual and Spatial CNN for Monkeypox Diagnosis,” Oct. 2024. 

[40] S. Sladojevic, M. Arsenovic, A. Anderla, D. Culibrk, and D. Stefanovic, “Deep Neural Networks Based 

Recognition of Plant Diseases by Leaf Image Classification,” Comput. Intell. Neurosci. , vol. 2016, pp. 1 –

11, 2016, doi: 10.1155/2016/3289801. 

[41] A. Ramcharan, K. Baranowski, P. McCloskey, B. Ahmed, J. Legg, and D. P. Hughes, “Deep Learning for 

Image -Based Cassava Disease Detection,” Front. Plant Sci. , vol. 8, Oct. 2017, doi: 

10.3389/fpls.2017.01852. 

[42] C. Shorten and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, “A survey on Image Data Augmentation for Deep Learning,” J. Big 

Data , vol. 6, no. 1, p. 60, Dec. 2019, doi: 10.1186/s40537 -019 -0197 -0. [43] S. P. Mohanty, D. P. Hughes, and M. Salathé, “Using Deep Learning for Image -Based Plant Disease 

Detection,” Front. Plant Sci. , vol. 7, Sep. 2016, doi: 10.3389/fpls.2016.01419. 

[44] S. H. Khan et al. , “A new deep boosted CNN and ensemble learning based IoT malware detection,” 

Comput. Secur. , vol. 133, p. 103385, Oct. 2023, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2023.103385. 

[45] S. H. Khan and R. Iqbal, “A Comprehensive Survey on Architectural Advances in Deep CNNs: Challenges, 

Applications, and Emerging Research Directions,” Mar. 2025. 

[46] S. H. Khan, N. S. Shah, R. Nuzhat, A. Majid, H. Alquhayz, and A. Khan, “Malaria parasite classification 

framework using a novel channel squeezed and boosted CNN,” Microscopy , vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 271 –282, 

Oct. 2022, doi: 10.1093/jmicro/dfac027.