Title: 2604.12733v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12733v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:09:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
1

# Transformer Based Machine Fault Detection From 

# Audio Input 

Kiran Voderhobli Holla 

Abstract —In recent years, Sound AI is being increasingly used to 

predict machine failures. By attaching a microphone to the 

machine of interest, one can get real time data on machine 

behavior from the field. Traditionally, Convolutional Neural Net 

(CNN) architectures have been used to analyze spectrogram 

images generated from the sounds captured and predict if the 

machine is functioning as expected. CNN architectures seem to 

work well empirically even though they have biases like locality 

and parameter -sharing which may not be completely relevant for 

spectrogram analysis. With the successful application of 

transformer -based models in the field of image processing starting 

with Vision Transformer (ViT) in 2020, there has been significant 

interest in leveraging these in the field of Sound AI. Since 

transformer -based architectures have significantly lower 

inductive biases, they are expected to perform better than CNNs 

at spectrogram analysis given enough data. This paper 

demonstrates the effectiveness of transformer -driven 

architectures in analyzing Sound data and compares the 

embeddings they generate with CNNs on the specific task of 

machine fault detection. 

Index Terms —Acoustic scene classification, Anomaly detection, 

Internet Of Things, Machine sound dataset, Transformer, 

Unsupervised anomalous sound detection 

I.  INTRODUCTION 

microphone could pick up anomalous vibration sounds from the 

machine well before it begins to heat up and starts activating 

the temperature sensors. In this context, the terms ‘fault 

prediction’ and ‘fault detection’ can be used interchangeably. 

Lastly, the ability to detect anomalies in machine sounds is a 

well -accepted art that comes with years of practice and domain 

experience [1]. It is now possible to train Machine Learning 

models at replicating this art. 

Training Machine learning models for fault prediction 

leveraging Sound AI has been well explored in recent years. 

Usually, Fast Fourier Transforms (FFT) are used to decompose 

the audio signal into its frequency components by applying the 

Fourier transform to successive overlapping signal segments. 

The result is a spectrogram, which is a two -dimensional 

representation of the signal in the time –frequency domain. With 

the proliferation of pre -trained models and the success of 

transfer learning, it became possible to leverage pre -trained 

CNNs by feeding them spectrograms images and fine -tuning 

them for a downstream task like fault detection. Alternatively, 

unsupervised learning techniques could be used, and this 

involves extracting features from the first model and feeding 

them to another downstream model which leverages 

unsupervised anomaly detection techniques to isolate faulty 

sounds (Fig 1). 

achine failures lead to unplanned downtime, loss 

of productivity, and hurt brand value. Predictive 

Maintenance therefore assumes utmost importance 

in Industry 4.0. With the proliferation of IOT, 

various types of sensors can now be deployed along with the 

machine of interest and real time feedback can be obtained from 

the field which enables fault predictions in advance. An 

interesting addition to the long list of potential sensors is the 

rather simple and ubiquitous microphone. At an extremely low 

cost, it can collect various sounds emanating from the machine 

of interest and transmit it back to a central server for analysis 

and fault prediction. 

Sound based fault prediction systems have significant 

advantages over alternate mechanisms. Apart from the low cost 

of the sensor and the easy installation, these are essentially 

contact -less i.e., the sensor only needs to lie in the vicinity of 

the machine and need not be physically attached to the same. 

Thus, it is completely non -intrusive and there is no risk of the 

sensor interfering with the (usually sensitive) equipment’s 

performance or posing a danger to it. An even bigger advantage 

is that these usually provide lead indicators of faults unlike 

other sensors which usually provide lag indicators. For e.g., the 

Fig. 1. Popular techniques for fault detection using Sound 

AI 

While CNN models are efficient and seem to work well 

empirically with spectrogram images, they have some 

characteristics which may hinder an optimal performance. CNN 

# Marchitectures, by their very nature, enforce inductive biases. The 

weights of CNN models are constrained by locality and weight -

sharing. However, spectrogram axes represent frequency and 

time unlike a conventional image. An object at any location in 

a conventional image is still the same object. However, a pattern 

at the bottom of a spectrogram is different from a similar pattern 

at the top due to frequency being on the y-axis. Moreover, there 

could be long range dependencies which are not well captured 

by a CNN. More recently, transformer [2] based architectures 

have been successfully used in Vision problems starting with 

Google’s Vision Transformer (ViT) 2020. Since transformer -

based architectures have significantly lower inductive biases, 

they are expected to perform better than CNNs at spectrogram 

analysis given ‘enough data’. They may also benefit from 

capturing long range dependencies. 

The challenge then is to gather ‘enough data’ in order to train 

and make the transformer model effective for Sound 

classification tasks. The lack of such training data prompted the 

Audio Spectrogram Transformer (AST) [3] team to leverage 

ViT weights as a starting point, since ViT was already trained 

on millions of images. While, AST had a very similar 

architecture as ViT, care had to be taken to transfer 2D spatial 

information of positional embeddings from ViT to AST so that 

AST could use the pretrained ViT weights for initialization and 

then further train specifically for sound classification. The AST 

team achieved state -of -the -art results on AudioSet, ESC -50, 

and Speech Commands classification tasks. 

This paper aims to evaluate the effectiveness of a

transformer -based architecture over a conventional CNN -based 

architecture on the sound data domain. We leverage a public 

dataset titled Malfunctioning Industrial Machine Investigation 

and Inspection (MIMII) [4] having labelled data of both normal 

and faulty machine sounds. MIMI was the first public dataset 

containing sounds of industrial machines under normal and 

anomalous operating conditions in real factory environments. It 

was released with the aim of assisting the machine -learning and 

signal processing community to enhance the field of automated 

facility maintenance. It continues to remain a popular choice for 

benchmarking in the research community particularly in the 

domain of machine sounds. The AST architecture is used as the 

choice of the transformer model as it is amongst the first 

convolution -free, attention -based model for audio 

classification. The utility of the embeddings generated by the 

AST -based model is compared with those generated by a CNN 

model of equivalent size. ResNeXt (Residual Networks with 

Aggregated Transformations) [5] is used as the choice for the 

CNN model. This model out -performs the older ResNet models 

and can be considered as the state of the art. In particular, 

resnext101_32x8d from the PyTorch Image Models (timm) 

repository is selected as this has 87 Mil parameters and is 

comparable in size to the AST model. 

The pretrained AST model is first fine -tuned using 

supervised learning techniques to generate (transformer) 

embeddings. We then fine -tune the CNN model on the same 

dataset to generate CNN embeddings. In both cases, the fine -

tuning is done by leveraging normal as well as anomalous 

samples from the MIMII dataset. The fine -tuned AST and CNN 

models are then compared at the task of fault detection. In 

practice, anomalous machine sounds are rare to capture and 

therefore access to labelled anomalous data may not always be 

guaranteed. Hence, embeddings generated from the non -

finetuned models of CNN and AST are also captured and used 

on a downstream non -supervised task of sound anomaly 

detection. The results are then compared to see if the 

transformer model performs better due to the lower inductive 

bias inherent in their architecture. This paper also analyzes the 

attention patterns in the internal transformer layers and the 

gradient -weighted Class Activation Mappings in the CNN to 

understand the reasons behind the performance. 

II.  RELATED WORK 

Sound AI techniques have been proposed to diagnose faults 

in diesel engines [6], induction motors [7], gearboxes [8] and 

other similar equipment. The first step usually involves 

extracting features that capture the temporal and spectral 

properties of the input sound. These features are then fed to a 

subsequent decision module which detects out -of -distribution 

samples. In classical machine learning, techniques such as a 1-

class classifier support vector machines or distance -based 

methods [9] or density -based methods such as the Local Outlier 

Factor (LOF) [10] are used to detect out of distribution samples 

which are regarded as faulty. 

More recently, a class of deep neural networks called 

autoencoders have been employed to detect machine anomalies. 

These are essentially reconstruction -based methods and the 

fundamental idea behind these methods is that a normal sound 

signal can be reconstructed accurately from a reduced latent 

space representation, whereas anomalous sounds cannot be 

reconstructed without a significant degradation. For e.g. [11] 

employed a neural network with an autoencoder structure to 

detect abnormalities in the emitted sound of a surface -mount 

device. Autoencoders are trained to reconstruct regular samples 

by learning an efficient representation of the input vector. The 

reconstruction residual -error is used as a metric to detect 

machine faults. These kinds of models can be trained using only 

the normal machine sound data and are particularly suitable for 

anomaly detection, where the volume of anomalous sound data 

is much smaller than normal sound data. 

In classification -based approaches using deep learning, 

supervised anomaly detection models are used which 

necessitate the presence of sufficient anomalous sound data 

during the training phase. In this approach, a classifier is trained 

from a set of labelled data instances containing normal as well 

as anomalous sounds, and the learned model is then used to 

classify test instances. 

Since anomalous sound data is almost always in short supply, 

an interesting two -part hybrid approach gaining popularity in 

past couple of years is to feed the sound data to a pre -trained 

deep learning model like the CNN or a Transformer and use the 

embeddings generated by the model's penultimate layer as input 

features for another downstream model which uses traditional 

techniques like distance or density -based information to 

identify anomalies. Additionally, fine -tuning on auxiliary tasks 3

in the same domain has been shown to strengthen the 

embeddings generated from the first model. For e.g. in [12], the 

dataset used had sound samples from variety of industrial 

machines and the authors finetune a Vision Transformer (ViT) 

on the auxiliary task of classifying the machine -type based on 

the sound sample. Though the fine -tuning task was unrelated to 

anomaly detection, it enhances the discriminative power of the 

embeddings generated by the ViT model. These embeddings 

were then fed to another downstream model employing k -

Nearest -Neighbour distance -based techniques to predict if the 

sound sample is anomalous or not. Thus, the first model 

essentially acts as a "feature extractor" and the embeddings it 

generates contain useful information learnt during pre -training 

and subsequent fine -tuning which a downstream model can 

make use of. 

While there have been studies leveraging transformers pre -

trained on image inputs like ViT, the usage of transformers 

trained on audio inputs like the AST is a relatively new and 

emerging area. This study goes a step further and compares the 

effectiveness of embeddings generated from an AST 

transformer model as compared with the embeddings generated 

from a similar sized CNN model on a downstream task of sound 

anomaly detection. The main focus in this work is the 

comparison of the effectiveness of CNN and AST embeddings 

generated from various types of sound inputs to detect 

anomalous samples, which to the best of my knowledge is the 

first such attempt. This paper also dwells deep into the inner 

layers of each model to understand the reasons behind the 

performance of the embeddings generated. In DCASE 

2023[13], the two -part hybrid approach outlined above was 

extensively used in many winning solutions and this approach 

can indeed be said to be the state of the art as of today. The 

success of the two -part hybrid approach relies excessively on 

the discriminative power of the embeddings that are extracted 

from the first model and hence it is vital to explore, compare 

and analyze the embeddings extracted from different classes of 

models as done in this study. 

III.  DATASET 

The MIMII dataset has four machine sound types —(i) 

valves, (ii) pumps, (iii) fans, and (iv) slide rails —and for each 

type of machine, they provide sounds from multiple product 

lines. 

All sounds are of 10 -second segments and comprise of 

normal as well as anomalous sounds. The sounds are captured 

from 8 microphones kept at a distance of 50 cm from the 

machine in a circular fashion. The sound is sampled 16 kHz. 

Apart from the target machine sound, background noise in 

multiple real factories was continuously recorded and later 

mixed with the target machine sound. Sound samples with 

signal to noise ratio (SNR) of 6 dB are used in this study. 

The valves are solenoid valves that are repeatedly opened 

and closed. The pumps are water pumps that drain water from 

a pool and discharge water to the pool continuously. The fans 

represent industrial fans, which are used to provide a

continuous flow of gas or air in factories. The slide rails in this 

paper represent linear slide systems, which consist of a moving 

platform and a stage base. 

The MIMII dataset ensures that different real -life anomalous 

scenarios have been considered for each kind of machine: for 

e.g., contamination, leakage, rotating unbalance, rail damage, 

etc (Table I). Additionally, background noise from real 

factories was mixed with the target machine, thus ensuring that 

the resulting sounds are as close to real life factory 

environments as possible. 

TABLE I

LIST OF OPERATIONS AND ANOMALOUS CONDITIONS 

Machine Type  Operations 

Examples of 

Anomalous 

conditions 

Fans  Normal 

operation 

Unbalanced, 

voltage change, 

clogging, etc. 

Valves 

Open / close 

repeat with 

different timing 

More than two 

kinds of 

contamination 

Pumps 

Suction from /

discharge to a 

water pool 

Leakage, 

contamination, 

clogging, etc. 

Slide rail 

Slide repeat at 

different 

speeds 

Rail damage, 

loose belt, no 

grease, etc. 

However, there are couple of limitations which need to be 

considered: 

• Domain shifts caused by changes in state of the machine 

or changes in the environment are possible and hence 

the models trained on such datasets need to have domain 

adaptation capabilities to perform well in inference 

environments. Irrespective of the choice of the model, 

domain adaptation techniques [14] can be employed to 

ensure that the model adapts to the target environments 

seamlessly. 

• A second limitation of the dataset is that it is imbalanced 

and contains considerably less abnormal data than 

normal data. To mitigate this, we use the Area Under the 

Curve (AUC) as the evaluation metric since this is 

sensitive to class imbalance. Moreover, in addition to 

supervised approach, we also evaluate the effectiveness 

of models using an unsupervised approach which does 

not need anomalous samples during training. 

The baseline code provided with the MIMII dataset consists 

of a simple autoencoder that uses normal sounds for training 

and anomalous sounds (along with unseen normal samples) for 

the testing phase. 

TABLE II 

SOUND SAMPLES USED IN THIS WORK 

Sound Sample  Normal Sound 

filecount 

Anomalous 

filecount 

fan_00  1011  407 

fan_all  4075  1475 

valve_all  3691  479 such that perceptually similar pitch intervals appear 

equal in width over the full hearing range. 

25% samples are taken for the test phase which remain 

untouched till inference. In the remaining samples, 10% are 

kept for validation and the rest for training. In unsupervised 

approaches, the anomalous samples from train and validation 

datasets are simply discarded. 

Among the machine types, only ‘fan’ has a fair number of 

anomalous samples. A very basic version of all models is tuned 

on the training/validation data of this machine (fan with id_00, 

henceforth called fan_00 set). The hyper -parameters selected 

are then used to train and infer each model separately using all 

product lines for that machine at a time. Thus, when dealing 

with valves, training and inference is done for all product lines 

under valve (which combines samples from id_00, id_02, 

id_04, id_06). 

IV.  PROPOSED APPROACH 

Three models are used in the study – the autoencoder 

baseline which is provided as part of the MIMII dataset, the 

CNN model and the transformer model. The audio pre -

processing steps are outlined first followed by each model’s 

architecture description, loss function and the evaluation 

function. 

For the pre -processing requirements, I mainly use the 

Librosa [15] package. The audio data in the MIMII dataset is in 

the form of WAVeform audio file (.wav) format. The audio is 

spread across 8 channels recorded from eight distinct 

microphones. This audio data needs to be converted to a single 

channel so that it can be processed further. The signals could be 

averaged across channels for each sample or alternatively, the 

sound from one of the microphones could be taken forward for 

processing while ignoring the other channels. For the objectives 

of this study, both approaches lead to similar results. I used the 

averaging option. The MIMII dataset was recorded at a

sampling rate of 16,000 (Hz) and each single .wav file is a 

segment of 10 seconds. In order to ensure that this signal can be 

processed by the models chosen, it needs to be converted to an 

appropriate input format using a set of pre -processing steps. 

Log -Mel spectrogram is the choice of input format for the 

models. Compared to a classic spectrogram, a Mel -spectrogram 

simulates the sound perception of humans and are a popular 

choice. 

Log Mel -spectrograms are generated from the input signals 

as follows: 

1)  The audio signals are mapped from the time domain to 

the frequency domain by repeatedly applying Fourier 

transforms. This is done in an overlapping manner 

across the entire length of the signal. The output is a 

spectrogram. 

2)  The spectrogram is further updated by applying the Mel 

scale to the frequency (y -axis) and the color dimension 

(amplitude) to decibels. The Mel scale is a quasi -

logarithmic function of acoustic frequency designed 

The key parameters involved in this process are the sampling 

rate, number of Mel bins (n_mels), number of samples per 

frame (n_fft) and the frame stride (hop_length) which 

determines the extent of overlap. Librosa is used for generating 

log Mel -spectrograms for the Autoencoder and the CNN model. 

A sampling rate of 16,000 is used which is the rate at which 

input audio samples in MIMII are recorded. Default values for 

other parameters in Librosa are used unless otherwise noted. 

There are minor changes in pre -processing based on the 

individual model as outlined below. 

• For the default Autoencoder, log Mel spectrograms are 

generated using n_fft length of 1024, hop_length of 

512 and 64 n_mels. This generates spectrograms of 

size 64 Mel energies over 313 time slices. In line with 

the MIMII baseline, a sliding window context of size 

5 frames is used to capture change in energies. This 

results in 309 samples for every sound sample, each 

having 64*5 Mel energies which gives the final shape 

of <309, 320>. Each of these 309 samples is 

considered as a separate training sample. Inference is 

done by simply making the batch size as 309, taking 

the average reconstruction error over a batch to be the 

output for that single sound sample and then 

measuring the deviation from the original signal. It 

must be noted that I have deliberately not deviated 

from the original MIMII baseline. 

• For CNN model, hop_length of 128 is used and the 

number of Mels (n_mels) is set to 128. The generated 

output is normalized, then triplicated across 3 channels 

and the resulting <3, 128, 1251> shaped output is fed 

to the CNN model. The triplication is needed since the 

CNN model of choice accepts 3-channel data as input. 

• In case of the AST model, the AST library -provided 

‘feature extractor’ is used to directly generate the log -

Mel spectrograms from the raw sound file. This library 

uses a sampling rate of 16,000 and n_mels = 128 by 

default, generating log -Mel spectrograms of shape 

<128, 1000> for a 10 sec audio file which is 

comparable to the dimensions of the spectrogram 

generated for the CNN model above. 

The details of the three AI models used in the experiments 

are explained below: 

A.  Autoencoder (AE) Model description 

The MIMII dataset is accompanied by a simple autoencoder 

baseline which is used for unsupervised fault detection. The 

spectrogram samples are passed through an encoding section of 

Fully Connected (FC) layers. The data then feeds into a 

bottleneck layer with a small number of nodes which forces the 

network to compress the input signal into the lower dimensional 

representation. This compressed representation feeds into a 

decoding section mirroring the same architecture as the encoder 

section in order to recreate the input signal. The dimensions of 

each FC layer are as follows: 

pump_all  3749  456 

slide_all  3204  890 5

• FC layer 1 (FC1): Input dimensions (i/p dim) = Number 

of dimensions (num_dim) in original(orig) signal. Output 

dimensions (o/p dim) = 64 

• FC2: i/p dim = 64. o/p dim = 64 

• FC3: i/p dim = 64. o/p dim = 8

• FC4: i/p dim = 8. o/p dim = 64 

• FC5: i/p dim = 64. o/p dim = 64 

• FC6: i/p dim = 64. o/p dim = 64, num_dim in orig signal 

This model is trained using only normal signals. The loss 

used is a Mean Squared Error between the original signal and 

the signal output by the model. Thus, the model is motivated to 

compress and decompress the signal retaining as much 

information from the original sample as possible. When an 

anomalous signal is fed to the model, the reconstruction error 

will be much larger than expected from the training set because 

the signal compression and decompression scheme learned by 

the network is only expected to work well for normal samples. 

The autoencoder model provided in MIMII baseline is 

rewritten in Pytorch and used without further fine -tuning as 

improving the baseline is not the primary focus of this paper. 

B.  CNN Model description 

As outlined earlier, resnext101_32x8d model from the 

PyTorch Image Models (timm) repository is used. The input to 

this model is the preprocessed spectrogram outlined in the 

previous section. This model has multiple convolution blocks 

one after the other and the final block outputs an embedding of 

2048 dimensions. 

In the unsupervised approach, these embeddings are 

extracted as -is and fed to a downstream model which does the 

anomaly detection. Scikit’s Local Outlier Factor (LOF) 

algorithm is chosen as the downstream model. It computes the 

local density deviation of a given data point with respect to its 

neighbours and considers as outliers those samples that have a 

substantially lower density than their neighbours’. The fitting 

and inference of this model are near instantaneous even on a 

CPU and hence this was the preferred choice. 

In the supervised approach, a sequential module with the 

below layers is added as the head of the model to enable 

classification.       

> •Linear(in_features=2048, out_features=256, bias=True)
> •Dropout(p=0.1, inplace=False)
> •ReLU()

• Linear(in_features=256, out_features=1, bias=True )

This model is finetuned using both normal and anomalous 

samples and then used for inference. In order to regularize the 

model, the number of parameters are reduced by freezing the 

lower layers of the CNN and making only the upper few layers 

trainable. The Learning Rate (LR) is progressively reduced 

across each ‘trainable’ layer of the CNN architecture moving 

backwards from the head. Thus, the fully connected layers are 

trained at the rate of LR, the block prior to that (bottleneck layer 

3 of the CNN) is trained at LR/10, the block prior to that 

(bottleneck layer 2) trained at LR/100 and so on. Thus, the head, 

which has untrained weights makes maximum movements 

based on the gradients, while the prior layers make smaller 

movements. At lower layers, weights are completely frozen 

since it is expected that the model can make full use of the 

pretrained weights without needing to recalibrate them for the 

classification task at hand. Empirically, these techniques seem 

to help in regularizing the model as well as making it parameter 

efficient. This makes it easy to experiment with large models 

on a frugal infrastructure. 

C.  AST Model description 

Similar to CNN, the following approach is taken. 

• In the unsupervised approach, the embeddings are 

generated by simply taking the output values from the 

penultimate layer of the pretrained, non -finetuned 

AST model and then feed it to the downstream LOF 

model for anomaly detection. 

• In supervised approach, the same head structure 

(outlined earlier) is appended to the AST model. The 

head has untrained weights like in the CNN. Here too, 

parameter freezing is done for the lowest layers of the 

AST. The head and a few upper layers of the AST are 

trained with different learning rates as explained in the 

CNN section. The LR is thus decayed layer upon layer 

moving backwards from the head and this enables 

fine -tuning on a frugal infrastructure. 

The loss functions vary based on the model and are outlined 

below along with other training details: 

• Mean Squared error for the reconstruction errors in the 

Autoencoder. The Epoch count is 50 and the LR is set 

to 0.001 with Adam optimizer. 

• Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) is used as the loss 

function for the supervised approaches in both CNN 

and AST. One training epoch with an LR of .001 using 

Adam optimizer is sufficient to bring in a good 

convergence. 

• Default metric for distance measurement (Minkowski) 

is used in the Scikit LOF library. This requires the 

setting of the ‘contamination’ and the ‘n_neighbors’ 

parameters. The latter is set to 4 samples as this 

seemed a reasonable sized neighborhood, however the 

‘contamination’ parameter needs hyper -tuning which 

is not possible in the absence of anomalous data. This 

is because in the unsupervised approach, all 

anomalous data samples from train and val are 

discarded. To solve this conundrum, I simply use 

contamination values from 0.1 to 0.4 during training 

and just take a simple majority vote over the 

predictions during inference. 

The evaluation function is common for all models and is the 

AUC (Area Under Curve). 

V.  EXPERIMENT RESULTS 

Table III contains the AUC across models. TABLE III 

AREA UNDER CURVE 

VI.  OBSERVATIONS AND ANALYSIS 

The proposed approaches are objectively evaluated using the 

Area Under the receiver operating characteristics Curve (AUC) 

metric for each model. The performance of the CNN -based and 

the AST transformer -based models are compared against each 

other in both the supervised and the unsupervised anomaly 

detection approaches. The results for each machine type are 

shown in Table III. Row 1 contains the results from the baseline 

model. Rows 2,3 show the AUC of the supervised approach for 

the CNN and AST based models respectively. The last 2 rows 

show the AUC for the unsupervised approach. 

Before analyzing the results, it is useful to analyze the pre -

processed spectrogram images which are fed as input to the AI 

models. Fig 3 shows normal sound spectrogram and Mel -

spectrogram for the fan (top) and the valve (bottom). There are 

differences due to the nature of operations of the machines. The 

fan and the pump are stationary, and their spectrograms differ 

from the valves and the sliders which are non -stationary 

machines. The patterns in the latter are more pronounced and 

impulse -like whereas the former has more continuous patterns 

with lesser spikes which might be more difficult for the AI 

model to analyze. 

Fig. 2. Spectrogram and Mel spectrogram for a normal 

sound sample of fan (top) and Valve (bottom) 

In general, the results show that the AST transformer -based 

model outperforms the CNN -based model in the supervised 

learning scenario. Even with very few anomalous samples, both 

models converge in just one training epoch and are able to 

classify sounds with a fair degree of accuracy. Among the 

different types of machines, it can be seen that the slider has the 

highest AUC while the fan's AUC is relatively lower. This is in 

agreement with other studies which have analyzed the MIMII 

dataset. As outlined earlier, the spectrograms for sliders have 

clear visible patterns and provide a rich feature set which can 

be discerned by the model and aid in its decision making. More 

importantly, as seen in Fig 3, the difference in normal and 

anomalous spectrograms are more pronounced for sliders which 

further helps the model. 

Fig. 3. Mel -Spectrograms for normal(left) and 

anomalous(right) sounds for slider (top) and Fan (bottom) 

While supervised training experiments are not the primary 

focus area in this study, the intent here is to show that even with 

very few anomalous training samples, a pretrained transformer 

such as AST could be fine -tuned in just 1 epoch to give very 

good fault predictions bettering that of CNN -based models. 

With the proliferation of digital twins, it could get easier to 

capture anomalous data over time and hence the supervised 

approaches to fault detection could start gaining importance. 

In the unsupervised task, it can be observed that the 

transformer architecture again outperforms CNN on all 

machine types except ‘fans’. On manually inspecting the Mel -

spectrogram images, it can be reasoned that the likely cause 

could be the lack of difference between spectrogram images of 

anomalous and normal fans as compared to other machines 

which have more fine granular variations and sharper 

differences. The CNN is able to discern and extract better 

feature embeddings in such a situation. 

To summarize, it is observed that the transformer model 

performs better than the CNN in the supervised approach and 

the embeddings it generates are slightly better than the CNN 

embeddings in the unsupervised approach as well. By using t-                                       

> Model Fan:
> 00
> Fan -
> All
> Pump -
> All
> Valve -
> All
> slide -
> All
> Autoencoder Baseline 0.7770 0.9081 0.8720 0.5757 0.8684
> CNN -Supervised 0.9990 0.9721 0.9874 0.9884 0.9990
> AST -Supervised 0.9990 0.9779 0.9904 0.9999 1.0000
> CNN -LOF 0.7478 0.8055 0.8201 0.7761 0.8144
> AST -LOF 0.7716 0.7696 0.8502 0.8099 0.8367

7

SNE plots [16], we can visualize the embeddings generated in 

a two -dimensional space as done in Figure 3. 

Fig. 3. Visualization of CNN/AST embeddings in a two -

dimensional space using t -SNE 

It is immediately noticeable that the AST transformer 

embeddings cluster the sounds into well -defined spaces 

relatively better than the CNN for most machine types. It is thus 

able to isolate and classify failures relatively better than the 

CNN as shown in Figure 4. These results are further enhanced 

after fine -tuning but what is important to note is that even 

without fine -tuning, the performance of the transformer -based 

model is relatively better. 

Fig. 4. Embedding visualization highlighting faulty sounds 

in a two -dimensional space using t -SNE 

The main advantage of a transformer model is its ability to 

effectively capture global contextual information through the 

self -attention mechanism, enabling it to model long -range 

dependencies and contextual relationships, which can improve 

robustness in tasks that require understanding global context. 

Also, the weights of CNN models are constrained by locality 

and weight -sharing. These inductive biases are hard -wired into 

the CNN model due to its architectural structure and indeed 

may be responsible for its success as far as traditional images 

are concerned. By encouraging translation equivariance 

(without pooling layers) and translation invariance (with 

pooling layers), the convolutional inductive biases make CNN 

models more sample efficient and parameter -efficient [17]. 

However, both these biases could hamper its performance as far 

as spectrogram images are concerned: 

• Weight sharing bias: The use of pooling layers 

common in CNNs along with the inductive bias of 

weight sharing is used to achieve translational 

invariance. This means a particular pattern of pixels is 

recognized wherever it is in the image and treated in a 

similar fashion by the model. This works well for regular 

images but in case of spectrograms, the axes represent 

frequency and time and thus a pattern at the bottom of a

spectrogram is different from a similar pattern at the top 

due to frequency being on the y -axis. Such patterns 

shouldn’t be treated the same way by the model and 

weight sharing across different locations could 

potentially hamper the model from discerning 

discriminating features which could help identify 

anomalies. Transformer based architectures do not 

suffer from this inductive bias and hence tend to provide 

a better feature set as far as audio inputs are concerned. 

• Locality bias: The locality bias of CNNs impair its 

ability to capture long -range dependencies. In contrast, 

transformer architectures like the AST, make use of the 

self -attention mechanism which is global in nature since 

it gathers information from the entire image. They are 

thus able to effectively capture and corelate distant 

pieces of information in an image. Moreover, unlike the 

CNNs which build the receptive area gradually across 

the layers, the representation in transformer 

architectures is similar in every layer. It thus literally has 

a "big picture" even in its early layers. This has been 

proven beneficial even in case of certain types of regular 

image analysis such as histopathological analysis [18], 

where it is critical to consider not just the region of 

interest, but also the neighboring tissues when 

diagnosing a particular disease. Indeed, Bello et al. [19] 

study this bias for regular images and mitigate it by 

augmenting convolutional layers in CNN with attention. 

In case of spectrogram images, the entire y-axis reflects 

the frequency bands at play at any instant of time and 

there could be important dependencies all across the 

length of the image. It is likely that the CNN model is 

unable to capture this information. 

A look at the attention pattern in Figure 5 confirms this 

behavior. The x-axis plots the 12 layers of the AST 

transformer each having 12 attention heads. The y -axis 

shows the average attention distance in pixels for each head. It can be seen that right from the first layer, there are certain 

heads that are “global” and have a long -distance oversight. A

CNN by its very design has a limited view in the early layers. 

Fig. 5. Attention patterns in the transformer heads 

across layers 

In Figure 6, we see the attention pattern of the last layer of 

the transformer as compared with the Grad -CAM [20] output of 

the last layer of the CNN. It can be seen that the transformer 

model is paying attention to the right parts of the input image 

whereas the CNN model is a bit more diffuse owing to its 

architecture and the reasons explained earlier. Figure 6 also 

shows a mid -point representation of the input image across the 

two models. It is observed that the AST model has well defined 

attention patterns mid -way itself and knows on what portions of 

the input spectrogram to focus on. The CNN model on the other 

hand has still a lot of noise at this stage and needs more layers 

to be able to focus on the important parts of the input 

spectrogram. It must be noted that these attention patterns of the 

AST are, to the best of my knowledge being highlighted for the 

first time. The original AST paper didn’t elaborate on the 

visualization and explainability aspects. 

Fig. 6. Transformer and CNN explainability for an 

input audio after resizing to the original image shape 

The above results also show that the parameter -efficient 

training techniques outlined earlier work effectively. Each 

epoch takes less than 10 mins on a personal M1 MacBook with 

16 GB default memory which enables experimenting with fine -

tuning large models on sound datasets without additional GPU 

infrastructure. 

VII.  CONCLUSIONS 

This study analyzes anomaly detection systems whose inputs 

are real -life industrial machine sounds. Two anomaly detection 

systems are evaluated – one based on CNNs, and another based 

on (AST) transformers. Experimental results show that the 

transformer -based model clearly outperforms the CNN -based 

model when using supervised learning methods. The 

transformer -based model also performs relatively better than 

CNN -based model when using unsupervised learning methods. 

Transformer architecture embeddings seem to be better suited 

for acoustic -related tasks since they have significantly less 

inductive biases as compared to CNNs, which are constrained 

by locality and weight -sharing and also lack the ability to 

capture long range dependencies. To the best of my knowledge, 

this is the first study which compares and analyzes in detail, the 

discriminative power of embeddings generated by CNNs and 

transformers from audio sounds for the downstream task of 

anomaly detection. This study also explains parameter -efficient 

techniques to train large transformer models making it easy for 

future researchers to replicate and enhance this work with 

minimal infrastructure costs. 

The use of Sound AI in field of Predictive Maintenance of 

machines is the way forward in Industry 4.0. As the number and 

complexity of the machines increase, it becomes difficult for 

maintenance workers to use traditional high -cost manual 

inspection methods. Automatic detection of machine failures 

through detection models helps cut down on the costs of 

production downtime [21]. By leveraging the simplest of IOT 

sensors – a microphone, one can significantly enhance the 

Prognostics and Health management experience. Sound based 

anomaly detection systems are contactless, cheap and have a 

low cost of installation. Since they produce lead indicators of 

faults, they are of vital importance in mission critical systems 

where actual failures could be catastrophic. 

There are two practical challenges hindering a more wide -

spread adoption of these techniques on the field: 

• The first challenge is the domain shift usually caused 

by changes in the state of the machine or changes in 

the environment itself during inference on the field. 

The trained models need to have excellent domain 

adaptation capabilities to perform well in the real -time 

environment. Domain adaptation techniques such as 

[14] are a well -researched area and need to be 

employed to ensure that the model adapts to the target 

environments seamlessly. 

• A second challenge is that the training datasets 

involved are imbalanced and contain considerably less 

abnormal data than normal data. Even unsupervised 

techniques need anomalous data for validation and 

testing phases, and these are hard to capture. With 9

rapid advancements in generative AI, it may soon be 

possible to generate realistic, synthetic anomalous data 

which could be a game changer for this domain. 

Secondly, digital twin adoption is widely increasing, 

and this could pave the way for more anomalous data 

collection from the field which could mitigate this 

challenge. 

VIII.  FUTURE WORK 

The era of Large models has begun with parameter sizes 

running to several billion. Large parameter sizes are associated 

with the ability to extract and capture more information from 

the training data thereby creating better feature embeddings. 

While individual large models could generate embeddings with 

differing discriminative power in a downstream task, a potential 

line of future study could revolve around investigating 

techniques to combine different embeddings in the best possible 

way in order to enhance the discriminative power of the final 

feature set. Such ensembling techniques could range from a 

simple averaging of results across models to more complicated 

fusion techniques and is a promising area of research. 

Ensembles with high diversity tend to yield better results [22]. 

For e.g. the results of this study indicate that embeddings 

generated from the CNN model are nearly as strong as 

transformer models in the unsupervised approach. Since 

transformer and CNN models perform feature extraction in 

significantly different ways generating diverse feature sets, it 

naturally follows that an ensemble of the embeddings 

generated, would likely improve the effectiveness of 

downstream tasks. It is also possible to enhance the 

discriminatory power of transformer embeddings in 

unsupervised settings by simply fine -tuning it on an auxiliary 

task related to the same domain. For e.g. in [12] the model was 

first fine -tuned to recognize and classify the machine type based 

on the input sound data available and then used for feature 

extraction. 

Sound transformers like AST could continue to retain a 

residual bias as long as transfer -learning from an image -trained 

model is done. Transformers exclusively trained on sound data 

from scratch are expected to have far less inductive bias and 

therefore perform better. Techniques to improve transfer 

learning from image -based models and/or creating efficient 

sound transformers from scratch is another future area of study. 

While this study has focussed exclusively on machine sound 

data, the techniques of Anomalous Sound detection used here 

can be used to enhance the results in other acoustic domains 

ranging from Conservation & Bioacoustics [23], Safety 

monitoring [24], Road surveillance systems [25] etc. But 

perhaps the greatest benefit is in the field of human health and 

particularly in the field of auscultation. The human body can be 

considered as one of the most complicated machines on this 

planet. Predictive health maintenance of the human body is of 

utmost importance. In particular, leading indicators of health -

related faults are needed since failures have catastrophic 

consequences for the individual concerned. The usage of sound 

transformers like AST will significantly enhance the results 

from auscultation performed on patients. Around the time this 

study was in progress, a paper [26] was released in parallel, 

where the effect of Abnormal Respiratory Sound Identification 

using AST Transformer was researched with results surpassing 

previous state -of -the -art. The usage of transformer -based 

models in Predictive maintenance using anomalous sound 

detection techniques will accelerate in the coming days. 

Efficient embedding extraction and fusion techniques that 

enhance the discriminatory power of the embeddings will 

significantly propel this field further. 

REFERENCES                                                                                                                                                       

> [1] Takuya Nishino, Shun Takeuchi, Isamu Watanabe (1 June 2017). “Fault
> sound simulations from normal sounds for data -driven prognosis based
> on human expert and vibration knowledge ”Physics. 2017 IEEE
> International Conference on Prognostics and Health Management
> (ICPHM)
> [2] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszkoreit, Llion
> Jones, Aidan N. Gomez, Lukasz Kaiser, Illia Polosukhin “ Attention Is
> All You Need ” 31st Conference on Neural Information Processing
> Systems (NIPS 2017), Long Beach, CA, USA.
> [3] Yuan Gong, Yu -An Chung, James Glass “ AST: Audio Spectrogram
> Transformer ”: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2104.01778
> [4] Harsh Purohit, Ryo Tanabe, Kenji Ichige, Takashi Endo, Yuki Nikaido,
> Kaori Suefusa, Yohei Kawaguchi “ MIMII Dataset: Sound Dataset for
> Malfunctioning Industrial Machine Investigation and Inspection ”:
> https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1909.09347
> [5] ResNext: Xie, S., Girshick, R., Dollar, P., Tu, Z., and He, K. Aggregated
> residual transformations for deep neural networks. CVPR, pp. 5987 –
> 5995, 2017.
> [6] Li, W.; Parkin, R.M.; Coy, J.; Gu, F. Acoustic based condition
> monitoring of adiesel engine using self -organising map networks. Appl.
> Acoust. 2002, 63, 699 –711.
> [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0003682X0200
> 004X]
> [7] Glowacz, A. Acoustic based fault diagnosis of three -phase induction
> motor. Appl. Acoust. 2018, 137, 82 –89.
> [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0003682X1830
> 0951?via%3Dihub]
> [8] Yao, J.; Liu, C.; Song, K.; Feng, C.; Jiang, D. Fault diagnosis of
> planetary gearbox based on acoustic signals. Appl. Acoust. 2021, 181,
> 108151.
> [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0003682X2100
> 2450?via%3Dihub]
> [9] Sarmadi, H.; Karamodin , A. A novel anomaly detection method based
> on adaptive Mahalanobis -squared distance and one -class kNN rule for
> structural health monitoring under environmental effects. Mech. Syst.
> Signal Process. 2020, 140, 106495.
> [https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S088832701930
> 7162?via%3Dihub]
> [10] Gu, X.; Akoglu, L.; Rinaldo, A. Statistical analysis of nearest neighbor
> methods for anomaly detection. In Proceedings of the 33rd Conference
> on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2019), Vancouver,
> BC, Canada, 8–14 December 2019; pp. 10921 –10931.
> [https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2019/file/805163a0f0f
> 128e473726ccda5f91bac -Paper.pdf]
> [11] Oh, D.Y.; Yun, I.D. Residual error based anomaly detection using auto -
> encoder in SMD machine sound. Sensors 2018, 18, 1308.
> [https://www.mdpi.com/1424 -8220/18/5/1308 ]
> [12] Antonio Almudevar, Alfonso Ortega, Luis Vicente, Antonio Miguel,
> Eduardo Lleida. VISION TRANSFORMER BASED EMBEDDINGS
> EXTRACTOR FOR UNSUPERVISED ANOMALOUS SOUND
> DETECTION UNDER DOMAIN GENERALIZATION
> [https://dcase.community/documents/challenge2022/technical_reports/
> DCASE2022_Almudevar_86_t2.pdf]
> [13] https://dcase.community/challenge2023/task -first -shot -unsupervised -
> anomalous -sound -detection -for -machine -condition -monitoring -results
> [14] Enver Fakhan; Ebru Arısoy. Domain Adaptation Approaches for
> Acoustic Modeling. 2020 28th Signal Processing and Communications
> Applications Conference (SIU). DOI:10.1109/SIU49456.2020.9302343
> [https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9302343/ ]

[15]  Librosa: McFee, Brian, Colin Raffel, Dawen Liang, Daniel PW Ellis, 

Matt McVicar, Eric Battenberg, and Oriol Nieto. “librosa: Audio and 

music signal analysis in python.” In Proceedings of the 14th python in 

science conference, pp. 18 -25. 2015. 

https://zenodo.org/badge/6309729.svg 

[16]  L.J.P. van der Maaten and G.E. Hinton. “Visualizing High -Dimensional 

Data Using t -SNE” In Journal of Machine Learning Research 9

(Nov):2579 -2605, 2008. 

[17]  Goodfellow, I., Bengio, Y., and Courville, A. Deep Learning. MIT Press, 

2016. 

[18]  Atabansi CC, Nie J, Liu H, Song Q, Yan L, Zhou X. A survey of 

transformer applications for histopathological image analysis: new 

developments and future directions. 

[https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10518923/ ]

[19]  Bello, I., Zoph, B., Vaswani, A., Shlens, J., and Le, Q. V. Attention 

augmented convolutional networks. In Proceedings of the IEEE 

International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 3286 –3295, 2019. 

[20]  Selvaraju, R. R.; Cogswell, M.; Das, A.; Vedantam, R.; Parikh, D.; and 

Batra, D. 2017. “Grad -CAM: Visual Explanations From Deep Networks 

via Gradient -Based Localization”. In Proceedings of the IEEE 

International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) 

[21]  Pech, M.; Vrchota, J.; Bednář, J. Predictive maintenance and intelligent 

sensors in smart factory: Review. Sensors 2021, 21, 1470. 

[https://www.mdpi.com/1424 -8220/21/4/1470 ]

[22]  L. Kuncheva & C. Whitaker, Measures of diversity in classifier 

ensembles and their relationship with the ensemble accuracy. Machine 

Learning. 51, 181 -207, 2003 

[23]  Juan Gabriel Colonna; Bernardo Gatto; Eulanda Miranda Dos Santos; 

Eduardo Freire Nakamura. A Framework for Chainsaw Detection Using 

One -Class Kernel and Wireless Acoustic Sensor Networks into the 

Amazon Rainforest. 2016 17th IEEE International Conference on 

Mobile Data Management (MDM) 10.1109/MDM.2016.86 

[24]  Najeeb Al -Khalli, Saud Alateeq, Mohammed Almansour, Yousef 

Alhassoun, Ahmed B. Ibrahim, Saleh A. Alshebeili. Real -Time 

Detection of Intruders Using an Acoustic Sensor and Internet -of -Things 

Computing.  https://doi.org/10.3390/s23135792 

[25]  A. Gagliardi, V. Staderini and S. Saponara, "An Embedded System for 

Acoustic Data Processing and AI -Based Real -Time Classification for 

Road Surface Analysis," in IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 63073 -63084, 

2022, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3183116 

[26]  Ariyanti W, Liu KC, Chen KY, Yu -Tsao. Abnormal Respiratory Sound 

Identification Using Audio -Spectrogram Vision Transformer. Annu Int 

Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2023 Jul;2023:1 -4. doi: 

10.1109/EMBC40787.2023 10341036. PMID: 38083782.