Title: 2603.24910v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.24910v1

Published Time: Fri, 27 Mar 2026 00:20:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
1

# Associative Memory using Attribute-Specific Neuron Groups-2: Learning and 

# Sequential Associative Recall between Cue Neurons for different Cue Balls 

Hiroshi Inazawa Center for Education in Information Systems, Kobe Shoin Women’s Uni versity １

,

1-2-1 Shinohara -Obanoyama, Nada Kobe 657 -0015,  Japan .

E-mail : inazawa706@gmail.com 

Keywords:  Cue  Ball  System , Attribute -Specific model , QR -code,  Multi  Image Learning and Recall, Linked 

Recall,  Associative  Memory, Neural Networks 

Abstract 

This  paper introduces a neural network model that learns multiple attributes as images and performs 

associated, sequential recall of the learned memories.  Briefly, the model presented here is an associative 

memory model that extends previous models [1] by  increasing the number of attributes.  In the real world, 

memory recall generates a chain of associations consisting of complex and diverse data with meaningful 

relations. However, because this experimental system is designed to implement and verify the proc essing 

operations behind such operations, we believe it is not a problem if the associative memory (i.e., the chain of 

data) is composed of attributes that do not necessarily have clear relation with each other.  Accordingly, the 

attribute -processing system s prepared in this study consist of five types: the C.CB -RN system for processing 

color attributes, the S.CB -RN system for shape attributes, and the V.CB -RN system for size attributes, as 

adopted in our previous paper [1], as well as the SV.CB -RN system fo r processing the names of the world's 

most beautiful scenery  (spectacular view names)  and the CN.CB -RN system for processing constellation 

names.  As before, the data presented to each CB -RN system are represented as image patterns using QR 

codes [2].  These  five types of CB -RN systems will be combined and trained with QR code pattern images of the 

attribute elements of each system. After that, when a pattern image of an attribute element is presented to 

any of the CB -RN systems, a mechanism will be construct ed in which a chain (associative) recall of pattern 

images of related attribute elements in the other trained systems will be generated. 

1.  Introduction 

This paper introduces a neural -network -based associative memory model [3 –9] that learns attributes as 

images and enables associated, sequential recall through the integration of multiple learned memories.  In 

other words, we investigate an extended version of the previous attribute associative memory model [1] by    

> １This was my affiliated institution until the end of March 2025, when I retired. Please note that as of April 2025, the university
> name has been changed from “Kobe Shoin Women's University” to “Kobe Shoin University.”

2

increasing the number of attributes.  The neu ral network system used in this study is the Cue Ball -Recall Net 

(CB -RN) system, which was employed in our previous work [1] [10] and is hereafter referred to as the CB -RN 

system, or simply CB -RN.  We set the number of associated attributes to five, motivat ed by reports suggesting 

that humans can associate approximately five distinct memories simultaneously [31 –34].  In this model, as in 

our previous work, attributes encode as characters and processed as pattern images of the QR -code [2].  In this 

study, the e lement names (character strings) constituting each attribute are represented using QR -code 

pattern images. As a result, the scope of applicability is greatly expanded, enabling relatively straightforward 

representation of subtle tastes, odors, and other se nsory modalities.  The  CB -RN  system first learns QR code 

pattern images that represent multiple attribute elements within each subsystem.  After learning, when a 

single image is presented to an arbitrary system, the four other images that were memorized in  association 

with it are sequentially recalled in their corresponding CB -RN systems.  In the real world, memory recall 

generates a chain of associations consisting of complex and diverse data with meaningful relations. However, 

because this experimental syst em is designed to implement and verify the processing operations behind such 

operations, it is not a problem if the associative memory (i.e., the chain of data) is composed of attributes that 

do not necessarily have clear relation with each other.  In this  paper,  five attributes were prepared: Color, S hape ,

Volume, Spectacular V iew  and C onstellation name.  Accordingly, the CB -RN systems configured in this study 

comprise five types: the  C.CB -RN system for processing C olor, the S.CB -RN system for  Shape , and the  V.CB -

RN system for Volume , which were adopted in our previous paper [1], as well as the SV.CB -RN syst em for 

processing the names of Spectacular V iew around the world and the  CN.CB -RN system for processing 

Constellation names.  While it is in principle poss ible to extend the model considered here to actual real -world 

objects, doing so would significantly increase both the number of attributes and the number of elements that 

compose them.  For example, with respect to the color attribute, as many as 465  distinct color categories are 

used in Japan.  The same holds true for shape. Therefore, applying this model directly to real -world objects 

from the outset is considered to be beyond the scope of this paper.  The basic operation of the model follows the 

well -known dynamics of associative memory [3 –9]. In associative memory, recalling a single item often triggers 

the successive recall of related memories, a phenomenon that is commonly observed in human memory 

retrieval.  In particular, memory recall appears to b e closely related to imagery, and we believe that the model 

presented here captures at least part of the underlying mechanisms. 

In recent years, AI —particularly generative AI —has undergone remarkable advances and has entered a 

practical stage of deployment  [11 –19]. Broadly speaking, these approaches fall under the research field known 

as deep learning, which is based on multilayer neural network techniques developed during the 1980s and 

early 1990s.  Meanwhile, memory -focused models appear to have received r elatively little attention compared 

to the learning models used in generative AI.  Memory models in neural networks are generally associative 3

memory models, which, like human memory processing, can recall entire stored information from presented 

fragments a nd sequentially search for related information [3, 6 –9, 28, 29].  We consider that humans probably 

learn by repeating stored memories in their brains.  Therefore, we consider that the research on memory 

mechanisms are an extremely important field, alongside  studies of learning mechanisms.  It should be noted  

> that, in recent years, the research of memory based on transformer theory has been explored [30].

In Section 2, the 

details of the model are described, Section 3 presents the simulation results and Section  4 provides conclusions 

and discussion. 

2.  Specification of the model 

In this section, we describe the details of the model. Although much of this description overlaps with that 

presented in Ref. [1], we have written them accurate to preserve the  independence of this paper.  The proposed 

model consists of a system (hereinafter referred to as the CB -RN system) consisting of a cluster of neurons 

(hereinafter referred to as the Cue B all) containing a large number of neurons (hereinafter referred to as  the 

cue neurons) and a two -dimensional spatially extended screen called a recall net that represents the image. 

In addition, the number of neurons in the recall net (hereafter referred to as recall neurons) is determined by 

the number of pixels in the imag e.  Note that in this study, all images are assumed to be of the same size, and 

therefore the number of recall neurons in the Recall Net is also kept constant.  In reality, one Recall Net would 

be sufficient. However, to make the explanation and image of the  model easier to understand, we decided to 

place one recall net for each Cue Ball.  Learning occurs between cue neurons and recall neurons, and between 

cue neurons within different  Cue  Balls.  One final thing to note is that one feature of this model is that  one cue 

neuron memorizes ２ the entire image, so as the number of memories stored increases, so does the number of 

cue neurons. 

As described in the Introduction, this paper considers five types of CB -RN systems, each corresponding to 

a specific attribute: C .CB -RN for Color processing, S.CB -RN for Shape processing, V.CB -RN for Volume 

processing, SV.CB -RN for Spectacular View processing, and CN.CB -RN for Constellation processing. 

Figure.1 illustrates the conceptual structure of these CB -RN systems.  

> ２The grandmother cell hypothesis has been propos ed, in which a single neuron is responsible for memory.

4             

> Figure.1: Schematic diagram of the CB -RN system. Each Cue Ball is represented as a sphere, and
> one Recall Net is assigned to each Cue Ball. All recall neurons in each Recall Net are connected to
> all cue neurons in the corresponding Cue Ball. There are no c onnections between recall neurons,
> nor between cue neurons of the same cue ball. However, there are connections between cue
> neurons of different cue balls. In principle, cue neurons of different cue balls can be connected
> freely. However, for convenience o f simulation processing, this paper is that the connections
> between cue neurons of different cue balls only exist in the following order: Color −Cue Bal l⇔
> Shape −Cue Ball ⇔Volume −Cue Ball ⇔Spectacular View −Cue Ball ⇔Constellation −Cue
> Ball.

In this  paper, each attribute element within a Cue Ball is represented as a character and displayed on the 

Recall Net as a QR -code pattern image.  For use in the simulation, the pixel values  of the generated QR code 

pattern image are converted into digital values  and input to each neuron.  Note that each QR -code pattern 

image consists of 116 × 116 pixels and is converted into a 13,456 -dimensional vector of digital values for use in 

the simulations. 

Following, we explain the basic skeleton of the mechanism: a cue  neuron in the cue ball is connected to 

every recall neuron in the corresponding recall net.  There are no internal connections among recall neurons    

> within a Recall Net. Cue neurons are connected to all cue neurons in different Cue Balls. Note that there are no
> connections among cue neurons within the same Cue Ball.

In this study, we assumed a simulation process and 

set the connections between cue neurons to exist only in the following order:  “Color -cue ball  ⇔ Shape -cue ball 

⇔ Volume -cue ball  ⇔ Spectacular sc enery -cue ball  ⇔ Constellations -cue ball. ” Each cue neuron has a 

threshold and outputs a normalized value of "0.0" or "1.0" based on the intermediate value. In principle, the 

number of cue neurons in a cue ball can be increased without limit, but in this s tudy, the number of cue neurons 5

in each cue ball was fixed at the number of attribute elements in the prepared dataset, i.e., seven types. 

Because all QR code image patterns were sized to the same resolution, the number of recall neurons (i.e., vector 

dime nsion) in each recall net is 116 × 116, resulting in a 13,456 -dimensional vector.  Next, we explain the 

specific processing steps. In the following, first, we explain the learning process, and then the recall process. 

An overview of the learning  (encoding)  operation is as follows. First, a single QR -code pattern image to be 

learned (represented as digital values) is presented to one Recall Net.  Subsequently, learning is performed 

between all recall neurons within this Recall Net and a single cue neuron (with in the corresponding Cue Ball) 

to which they are connected.  Specifically, after the recall neuron processes the input from this cue neuron, 

𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  learns using the output data of the recall neuron and the image pattern data of the presented QR code .

In this case, learning corresponds to the adjustment of the synaptic weights of the recall neurons, denoted as 

𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  . The superscript “ 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ” is an identifier used to distinguish each Cue Ball and represents a specific 

attribute (e.g.,  “Color”).  After this, the outputs of all recall neurons in this recall net are fed back to the cue 

neurons trained by these recall neurons, and the cue neurons are trained by adjusting their synaptic weights 

(denoted as  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ).  Through these learn ing processes, bidirectional learning between the cue neuron and all 

recall neurons within the Recall Net is completed.  These processes are performed for five CB -RN systems 

corresponding all attributes (Color, S hape,  Volume , Spectacular View, and C onstellation).  After these steps are 

completed, the next learning step involves learning between cue neurons belonging to different cue balls.  For 

example, learning is performed between the  𝑘 -th cue neuron in the Color −Cue Ball and the  𝑙 th cue neuron 

in  the S hape −Cue Ball, and so on. 

Next, we provide an overview of the recall process for learned images.  To check whether the synaptic 

weights of the recall neurons,  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , have been learned correctly, the outputs of the l earned cue neurons in 

the  Cue B all are input to all corresponding recall neurons in the recall net, and the resulting QR code image 

pattern displayed in the recall net is checked.  Also, the success of learning of the cue -neuron synaptic weights, 

𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , can be verified thro ugh the following procedure.  The learned QR code pattern image is presented to a 

recall net, and the output of every recall neuron in this recall net is input to every c ue neuron in the 

corresponding Cue B all.  At this stage, each cue neuron generates an ou tput. If a cue neuron whose output 

value is close to the learning target value  𝜃  specified during training is found, it is determined that the cue 

neuron has learned the corresponding pattern.  For verification, the output of this cue neuron is normalized  to 

1.0 using a threshold function and fed back to all recall neurons in the corresponding recall net, resulting in 

the recall of the learned (presented) pattern.  Note that the threshold value of the threshold function is 

determined by the simulation proces s.  Finally, we describe the recall process between cue neurons belonging 

to different Cue Balls.  When the learned QR code image pattern is presented to the recall net, the 

co rresponding learned cue neuron (e.g., the  𝑘 -th neuron in Color −Cue Ball)  in the a ssociated  Cue B all output 6

1.0.  This output is provided as input to all cue neurons in another  scheduled  Cue Ball. In this Cue Ball, only 

the trained cue neuron (e.g., the  𝑙 -th neuron  in Style −Cue Ball ) produces an output of 1.0, indicating that 

learning  has been successfully completed. 

Now, let us describe these learning and recall processes more explicitly using mathematical formulations. 

We first describe the learning process, followed by the recall process.  In the recall neuron learning process 

(𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  learning), input is made from a single cue neuron of any cue ball to all recall neurons in the 

corresponding recall net. The input -output relation (the output of the recall neuron , 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  ) at this time is 

expressed as follows: 

𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , (1) 

where  𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  denotes the output of the  𝑖 -th cue neuron, and  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  denotes the output of the j -th recall neuron. 

𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  denotes the synaptic weight from the  𝑖 -th cue neuron to the  𝑗 -th recall neuron in the corresponding 

Recall Net.  Although Eq. (1) is a commonly used formulation,  it is important to note that no summation is 

taken over the index  𝑖 . Here, as mentioned above, “ 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ” indicates the attribute ( Color 、Shape 、Volume 、

Spectacular View 、Constellation) used to distinguish each Cue Ball. Table 1 also summarizes the attribute 

identifiers and components of each attribute for each Cue Ball. 

𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ≡ 𝑎 ~𝑒 = 𝐶 (= 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 ), 𝑆 (= 𝑆𝑡𝑦𝑙𝑒 ), 𝑉 (= 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 ), 𝑆𝑉 (= 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑉𝑖𝑒𝑤 ), 𝐶𝑁 (= 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 )

𝑪  𝑺  𝑽  𝑺𝑽  𝑪𝑵 

0. 𝑟𝑒𝑑  0. 𝑠𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑒  0. 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎 − 𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒  0. 𝐼𝑔𝑢𝑎𝑧𝑢  0. 𝐴𝑛𝑑𝑟𝑜𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑎 

1. 𝑜𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑒  1. 𝑐𝑖𝑟𝑐𝑙𝑒  1. 𝑙𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑒  1. 𝑀𝑎𝑢𝑛𝑎𝐾𝑒𝑎  1. 𝐴𝑞𝑢𝑎𝑟𝑖𝑢𝑠 

2. 𝑦𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤  2. 𝑜𝑣𝑎𝑙  2. 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚  2. 𝑀𝑖𝑙𝑓𝑜𝑟𝑑𝑆𝑜𝑢𝑛𝑑  2. 𝐶𝑎𝑠𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑝𝑒𝑖𝑎 

3. 𝑔𝑟𝑒𝑒𝑛  3. 𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒  3. 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙 − 𝑚𝑒𝑑𝑖𝑢𝑚  3. 𝑀𝑜𝑛𝑢𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑉𝑌  3. 𝐶𝑒𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑢𝑟𝑢𝑠 

4. 𝑏𝑙𝑢𝑒  4. 𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑝𝑒𝑧𝑖𝑜𝑑  4. 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙  4. 𝑅𝑜𝑐𝑘𝑖𝑒𝑠𝑀𝑇 . 4. 𝐶𝑦𝑔𝑛𝑢𝑠 

5. 𝑖𝑛𝑑𝑖𝑔𝑜  5. 𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑎𝑛𝑔𝑙𝑒  5. 𝑒𝑥𝑡𝑟𝑎 − 𝑠𝑚𝑎𝑙𝑙  5. 𝑒𝑇𝑘𝑎𝑝𝑜  5. 𝑂𝑟𝑖𝑜𝑛 

6. 𝑝𝑢𝑟𝑝𝑙𝑒  6. 𝑟 ℎ𝑜𝑚𝑏𝑢𝑠  6. 𝑚𝑖𝑛𝑖  6. 𝑌𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑜𝑤𝑘𝑛𝑖𝑓𝑒  6. 𝑃𝑒𝑟𝑠𝑒𝑢𝑠 

Table.1:  Cue Ball Attribute Identification and Attribute Elements . Each cue ball's identification code is 

displayed at the top, with its attribute elements  numbered 0 to 6 below.  In actual use, only the attribute 

element name (such as the string “ 𝑟𝑒𝑑 ” without a leading index) is converted into a QR code image pattern for 

use in the model. 

Also, when converting to QR codes, the textual labels describing  each attribute element (e.g., “ 𝑟𝑒𝑑 ”) are 

transformed into QR -code image patterns; the leading numerical indices shown in the table are not included 

in the images.  Learning is performed using the gradient descent method (GDM) [22, 23], so the error function 

𝐸 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  in this case is expressed as follows: 7

𝐸 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ≡ 12 ∑(𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 )2

, (2) 

> 𝑀 𝑗=0

where  𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝  denotes the element value of the QR -code pattern presented to the  Recall Net and “ 𝑝  ”

represents the pattern number (which also corresponds to the attribute element number), and  𝑀  represents 

the number of recall neurons in one recall net ( 𝑀 = 116 × 116 − 1 = 13,455 ).  The weight update rule derived 

using the GDM is given as follows (see [1] for  details). 

𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) + ⊿𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) (3) 

⊿𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) = −𝜀 𝑊 

𝜕𝐸 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 

𝜕𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 𝜀 𝑊 (𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 − 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡)) 𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) , (4) 

where 

t is the number of updates and  𝜀 𝑊  is the learning rate, which is common to all recall nets.  The learning 

rate is  set to  𝜀 𝑊 = 1.0 . Using the input –output relation in  eq . (1) together with the weight learning rules in 

Eqs.  (3) and (4), we can show that  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  can reliably learn the presented patterns. 

𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1)𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) 

= (𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) + (𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 − 𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡))𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) (5) 

Assuming there is an output from the  𝑖 -th cue neuron, and setting  “𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡) = 𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) = 1.0 ”, eq . (5) 

becomes as follows. 

𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 (6) 

In this way, after training, “ 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 + 1) ” matches the image pattern (i.e., attribute elements) of the presented 

QR code. 

Next, let us look at the learning process of the synaptic weights from the recall neuron to the cue neuron. 

The input -output relation from the recall neuron to the cue neuron (the output of the cue neuron,  𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ) is 

given as follows: 8

𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 𝑓(𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ) = 𝑓 (∑ 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑀 𝑗=0 

𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ) = { 0 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 < 𝐷 1 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ≥ 𝐷 , (7) 

where  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  denotes the inte rmediate output value of the  𝑖 -th cue neuron before thresholding, and  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 

represents the input value from the  𝑗 -th recall neuron.  In this case, we use the value  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  that is obtained 

from “ 𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 1.0 ” using learned  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 . 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  denotes the synaptic weight from the j -th recall neuron to the 

i-th cue neuron, where  𝑓  is a threshold function, and  𝐷  is a threshold value common to all cue neurons of 

each Cue Ball.  The memory (memory) training is performed using the sam e GDM as in the training of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 .

In this case, the error function is defined as follows: 

𝑒 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ≡ 12 ∑(𝜃 − 𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 )2𝐿 𝑖=0 

, (8) 

where  𝜃  is an arbitrary (constant) value specified as the learned  value  of  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , and it is set identically for all 

cue neurons within each Cue Ball.  In addition,  𝐿  is equal to the number of attribute elements within each 

Cue Ball minus one, and in the present setting  “𝐿 = 6 .” Using these definitions, the weight update rule derived 

by GDM is given as follows. 

𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1) = 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′) + ⊿𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′) , (9) 

⊿𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′) = −𝜀 𝑉 

𝜕𝑒 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 

𝜕𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 𝜀 𝑉 (𝜃 − 𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 ′)) 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 ′) , (10) 

where  𝑡′  denotes the update iteration index, and  𝜀 𝑉  is the learning rate.  We use the input value  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  that 

is obtained from Eq. (1) after the learning of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , in the  same manner as described above.  Note that the 

learning rate  𝜀 𝑉 , like  𝜀 𝑊 , is set to 1 .0 for all cue neurons of each Cue B all.  Similar to the learning of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , by 

using the input -output relation in eq . (7), the synaptic weight learning rules in  Eqs.  (9) and (10), and the 

conditions for  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  set below, we can reliably learn the weight  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  as shown below.  Note that in this case, 

𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  is assumed to have an output value of 1.0 from eq . (7) as a result of the input from the Recall Net. 

𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1) = ∑ 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑀 𝑗=0 

(𝑡′ + 1)𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 

= ∑ 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡 ′)𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (1 − ∑(𝑦 𝑘 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 )2𝑀 𝑘=0 

) + 𝜃 ∑(𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 )2𝑀 𝑗=0 

, (11) 

> 𝑀 𝑗=0

9

where we consider that  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  in eq . (1) is equal to  𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 , and impose the following normalization condition 

on  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 .

∑(𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 )2𝑀 𝑗=0 

= ∑(𝑑 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 𝑝 )2𝑀 𝑗=0 

≡ 1 (12) 

By applying eq . (12), eq . (11) can be rewritten as follows. 

𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1) = 𝜃 (13) 

Thus, after learning  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , 𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1)  coincides with the learned value  𝜃 . Appl ying the threshold function 

in  eq. (7) to  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1)  in  eq. (13) yields  “𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 (𝑡′ + 1) = 1.0 .”

Finally, we will discuss learning between cue neurons in the  Cue  Ball. In actual processing, attribute chains 

are set as  “ 𝑎 ⇒ 𝑏 ⇒ 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑑 ⇒ 𝑒 ” and  “𝑒 ⇒ 𝑑 ⇒ 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑏 ⇒ 𝑎 ” (see Table 1). To simplify the explanation, we will 

use only the attribute chain  “𝑎 ⇒ 𝑏 ” as an example below.  Note that during these learning processes, the cue 

neurons connecting each Cue Ball and its corresponding Recall Net are assumed to have been already learned. 

The output of the kth cue neuron for the  𝑎 − Cue Ball  (e.g.,  𝑎  represents  “𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟  ”), “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 = 1.0 ”, which 

responded to the pattern presented to the recall net, is used to learn the  𝑙 -th  cue neuron associated with the 

𝑏 −Cue Ball (e.g.,  𝑏  represents  “𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒 ”).  The input -output relation between cue neurons is expressed as 

follows in the same format as  eq. (7). 

𝑥 𝑙 𝑏 = 𝑓(𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 ) = 𝑓(𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 ) = { 0 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 < 𝐷 1 𝑓𝑜𝑟 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 ≥ 𝐷 , (14) 

𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏  denotes the connection weight from the  𝑘 -th cue neuron of  𝑎 −Cue Ball to the  𝑙 -th cue neuron of  𝑏 −Cue 

Ball.  This means that each cue neuron has two types of connection weights:  𝑣 𝑙𝑘 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , which receives input from 

the recall net, and  𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 , which  receives input from the other Cue B alls.  𝑓  is the threshold function and  𝐷  is 

the common threshold  ap plied  to all cue neurons in each Cue B all.  A schematic diagram of the input –output 

relations between these Cue Balls is shown in figure.2. 10 

Figure 2: Variables between cue neurons for different Cue Balls.  The input and output variables and 

connection  weights of the cue neuron between two Cue Balls ( 𝑎 ~𝑒  =Color, Shape, Volume, Spectacular 

View, Constellation)  have been  are shown.  When an image pattern is presented to  𝑎 −Recall Net, the 

kth cue neuron in  𝑎 −Cue Ball outputs  𝑥 𝑘 

> 𝑎

, which in turn outputs the output  𝑥 𝑙  

> 𝑏

from the learned cue 

neuron in  𝑏 −Cue Ball.  As a result, the learned QR -code pattern image is displayed in  𝑏 −Recall Net. 

Next, we show the learning equation for the cue neuron of  𝑏 −Cue Ball . First, we define the error function of 

𝑏 −Cue Ball  as follows: 

𝜂 𝑏 ≡ 12 ∑(𝜃 − 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 )2𝐿 𝑙=0 

, (15) 

𝜃  is the same as the parameter defined as the learning value of  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  in eq . (8). Here, it is assigned as the 

learning value of  𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏  and is treated as the same constant value for all Cue Balls.  Using these definitions, the 

weight update  equation derived by the GDM is given as follows. 

𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡) + ⊿𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡) , (16) 

⊿𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡) = −𝜆 𝐶𝐵 

𝜕𝜂 𝑏 

𝜕𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 = 𝜆 𝐶𝐵 (𝜃 − 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 (𝑡)) 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 (𝑡) , (17) 

where  𝑡  is the update iteration number and  𝜆 𝐶𝐵  is the learning rate. Like  𝜀 𝑊  and  𝜀 𝑉 , 𝜆 𝐶𝐵  is set  to 1.0 for 

cue neurons in all Cue B all.  As in the previous cases, by using the input –output relation in eq . (14) and the 

weight learning equations in  Eqs.  (16) and (17), the connection weights  𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏  can be reliably learned.  In this 

case, the le arned pattern image is presented to Recall N et a, so the output of the kth cue n euron of  𝑎 − Cue 

Ball is “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 =1.0 ”. Using this, the following equation can be obtained from  Eqs.  (14), (16), and (17): 11 

𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1) = 𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1)𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 

= 𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏 (𝑡) + 𝜃 − 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 (𝑡) = 𝜃 (18) 

Therefore, after learning  𝑢 𝑙𝑘 𝑏  , 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1)  will match the learned value  𝜃 . Note that applying the threshold 

function in eq. (14) to  𝑞 𝑖 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1)  in eq. (18) yields “ 𝑥 𝑙 𝑏 (𝑡 + 1) = 1.0 .” 

3.  Simulation and Results 

In this section, we describe simulations of the learning and recall processes introduced  in Section 2.  The 

pattern data used in the simulation is obtained by expressing the attribute elements as characters and we use 

converting them into QR code image patterns, as explained in Section 2.  As described above, each QR -code 

pattern image consists  of 116 × 116 = 13,456 pixels, which are converted into a 13,456 -dimensional vector of 

digital values for use in the simulations.  There are five CB -RN systems used: C.CB -RN, S.CB -RN, V.CB -RN, 

SV.CB -RN, and CN.CB -RN.  In the learning process, processing betwe en the Cue Ball and the Recall Net is 

performed first.  In this procedure, the attribute element images set for each cue ball are extracted from the 

top down (see Table .1), and the connection weights  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎  and  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎  are learned.  Subsequently, learnin g is 

performed between cue neurons of different Cue Balls.  In this learning procedure, the process  is first executed 

in the order  “𝑎 ⇒ 𝑏 ⇒ 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑑 ⇒ 𝑒 ” (denoted by c mb = 0), and then in the order  “𝑒 ⇒ 𝑑 ⇒ 𝑐 ⇒ 𝑏 ⇒ 𝑎 ” (denoted 

by cmb = 1)  , where  see Tabl e 1 . First, we present the Recall Net with an image pattern of an arbitrary QR code that has 

already been  learned . In this state, the cue neuron that is learning the presentation pattern is outputting (e.g.,  𝑥 𝑘 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 = 1.0 ). 

Using this output, the next Cue  Ball is learned by the cue neuron using equations (14), (16), and (17). 

Furthermore, the output of this second cue neuron (e.g.,  𝑥 𝑙 𝑆𝑡𝑦𝑙𝑒 = 1.0 ) is provided as the input to the cue neuron of the 

subsequent Cue Ball, and the same learning procedure is a pplied, until the final Constellation Cue Ball.  Note that, corresponding 

to cmb=0 and 1, the chains of two cue neuron numbers are learned in sequence.  If cmb=0, then in the first chain (sequence 1), 

the cue neurons are learned in the order  “0th ⇒1st ⇒2nd ⇒3rd ⇒4th” , but in the second chain (sequence 2), the cue neurons are 

learned in the order  “0th ⇒4th ⇒3rd ⇒2nd ⇒1st .” Next, i f cmb= 1, then in the first chain (sequence 1), the cue neurons are 

learned in the order  “0th ⇒6th ⇒5th ⇒4th ⇒3rd ”, but in the second chain (sequence 2), the cue neurons are learned in the 

order  “0th ⇒3rd ⇒4th ⇒5th ⇒6th .” The cue neuron indices (e.g., 0th, 1st, etc.) correspond to the respective attribute element 

indices (see Table 1).  In the first sequence of each, the l earning coefficient θ is set to 100, but in the second sequence it is set to θ 

= 110, producing in the results in a different learning process. 

Below, we describe the simulation algorithms for these learning and recall processes.  First, we describe the 

lea rning of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 .12 

[Algorithm 1  — Learning of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ]

1.  Specify any Cue Ball .

2.  Initialize each input variables, coupling coefficients, and the learning rate: 

𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 1.0 , 𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 0.0 , 𝜀 𝑊 = 1.0 

3.  The element values  of each image  pattern presented to the Recall Net are substituted into Eqs. (4), 

(5), and the synaptic weights are learned. 

4.  Save the learned values of  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  to a file. 

5.  Repeat processes 1 –4 while varying the  Cue Ball .

Next, the learning algorithm for  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  is written as follows: 

[Algorithm 2  — Learning of  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ]

1.  Specify any Cue Ball. 

2.  Initialize each input and output variable, connection coefficients, learning rate, and set 

learning values  and thresholds: 

𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 1.0 , 𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 1.0 , 𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 0.0 , 𝜀 𝑉 = 1.0 , 𝜃 = 100.0 , 𝐷 = 72.0 

※ The threshold D = 72.0 has been set based on the simulation results. 

3.  Using the cue neuron output  𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  obtained in equation (7),  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  is calculated from equation (1). 

4.  For all cue neurons of the specified cue ball, calculate  𝑥 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  (and  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ) in the same way as in step 

3. 

5.  Using the  𝑦 𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  and  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  calculated in step 4, we learn the connection weights defined in 

equations (9) and (10). 

6.  Save the learned values of  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  to a file. 

7.  Repeat steps 2 –6 while varying the Cue Ball. 

Finally, we describe the algorithm for the learning process between cue neurons of different Cue Balls. 

[Algorithm 3  — Learning of  𝑢 𝑘𝑙 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 ]

1.  Define two processing  groups  for the Cue Balls, denoted by  cmb = 0,1 :

cmb = 0  [𝑎 = Color → 𝑏 = Shape → 𝑐 = Volume → 𝑑 = Spectacular View → 𝑒 = Constellation] 

cmb = 1  [𝑎 = Constellation → 𝑏 = Spectacular View → 𝑐 = Volume → 𝑑 = Shape → 𝑒 = Color] 

2.  Initialize each input variables,  coupling coefficients, and the learning rate and setting the 

learned parameters and thresholds :

𝑥 𝑘 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 1.0, 𝑢 𝑘𝑙 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟 = 0.0 , 𝜆 𝐶𝐵 = 1.0 , 𝜃 = 100.0 , 𝐷 = 72.0 13  

> 3.

For cmb=0,1, processing is performed in the order of the cue neuron numbers (image pattern s) of 

the first and second series defined below. :        

> cmb = 0 :1st series [0th ⇒ 1st ⇒ 2nd ⇒ 3rd ⇒ 4th ]2nd series [0th ⇒ 4th ⇒ 3rd ⇒ 2nd ⇒ 1st ]
> cmb = 1 :1st series [0th ⇒ 6th ⇒ 5th ⇒ 4th ⇒ 3rd ]2nd series [0th ⇒ 3rd ⇒ 4th ⇒ 5th ⇒ 6th ]

4.  The first output value  𝑥 𝑘 𝑎  of the cue neuron in  𝑎 − Cue Ball is calculated by inputting the 

memorized image pattern into the corresponding Recall Net. 

5.  Using  𝑥 𝑘 𝑎  obtained in step 4, the intermediate output  𝑞 𝑙 𝑏  of the cue neuron in the next 

𝑏 − Cue Ball is calculated. 

6.  Using  𝑞 𝑙 𝑏  and  𝑥 𝑘 𝑎  obtained in  step 5, the connection weights of Eqs. (16) and (17) are learned. 

7.  Save the learned values of  𝑢 𝑘𝑙 𝑏  to a file.  

> 8.

Return to step 2 and continue processing each series set in step 3.    

> ※Note that t he learning value 𝜃 is set to 100 for 1st series and to 110 for 2nd series.

9.  Return to step 1 and repeat steps 1 to 8 above with the  Cue  Ball combination order determined 

by cmb=2. 

In the following, we describe the algorithm for the recall process.  In the recall process, a trained QR code 

pattern image is first presented to the Recall Net corresponding to the  𝑎 − Cue Ball. At this time, the pattern 

image data is input to all cue neurons of the  𝑎 − Cue Ball, but only the  𝑘 -th cue neuron that has traine d the 

presented pattern generates an output ( 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 = 1.0 ).  This output value is input to all learned cue neurons of 

𝑏 −cue ball to examine their outputs.  Now find the  𝑞 𝑙 𝑏  of the neuron that produces the maximum output and 

use a threshold function to calculate  𝑥 𝑙 𝑏  (which have a value of 1.0).  If this output is input to all learned recall 

neurons of the corresponding Recall Net, the corresponding learned QR -code pattern im age will be displayed. 

After this, we use  𝑥 𝑙 𝑏 （ = 1.0 ） to check the output of all the cue neurons in the next  𝑐 −Cue Ball and do the 

same process as above.  This process is repeated until the final Cue Ball is reached. A summary of these recall 

algorithms  is provided below. 

[Algorithm 4  - Associative recall between lea rned cue neurons for different Cue Balls ]

1.  Specify the  group  to be presented (cmb=0,1) (see Algorithm 3) 

2.  The QR code pattern images learned by the cue neurons in  𝑎 − Cue Ball are presented to  the 

corresponding Recall Net. 

※ The presented pattern images are in the order of the cue neuron numbers specified in step 3 

of Algorithm  3. 

3.  The obtained output value “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑎 (= 1.0) ” is input to all cue neurons in  𝑏 −Cue Ball, and the output 14 

value “ 𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 ” is  calculated using eq. (14). 

4.  The largest value obtained,  𝑞 𝑙 𝑏 , is used to calculate “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑏 (= 1.0) ” using a threshold function. 

※ When the output value “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑏 (= 1.0) ” is used, the memorized QR code image pattern will be displayed 

in Recall Net. 

5.  This output  value “ 𝑥 𝑘 𝑏 = 1.0 ” is input to all cue neurons in c -Cue Ball, and the same process as step 

3 to step 4 is performed. 

6.  Repeat these steps until  𝑒 −Cue Ball is reached. 

7.  Once the “cmb = 0” process is complete, return to step 2 and perform the “cmb = 1” process  in the 

same way. 

In the following, we conduct simulations using these algorithms to verify whether learning and recall 

proceed as expected.  Figure 3 shows the output values  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  of all cue  neurons (0th to 6th) for each Cue Ball 

(Color, S hape , V olume,  Spectacular View, and C onstellation) after learning  𝑤 𝑗𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  and  𝑣 𝑖𝑗 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  according to 

Algorithms 1 and 2. 

Figure 3:  𝑞 𝑖  

> 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟

of the cue neuron for each Cue Ball corresponding to the learning pattern number. 

Each Cue Ball, we examined the output values  of the 0th to 6th neurons.  In the Color −Cue Ball, the 

QR -code image that the 0th neuron has been learning has presented to the Recall Net, and the output 

values  of the 0th to 6th neurons have examined.  Similarly, we have presented  to the Recall Net  the 

learned images to the 1st neuron for Shape −Cue Ball, the 2nd neuron for Volume −Cue Ball, and the 

3rd neuron for Spectacular View −Cue Ball, and have examined the output values  of each cue neuron. 

In addit ion, for use in later simulation processing, in Constellation −Cue Ball, the image learned by 

the 0th neuron, rather than the 4th neuron, is presented  to the Recall Net , and the results of 

calculating the output values  of each cue neuron are shown.  The fi nal output value of the neuron that 

outputs the largest  “𝑞 𝑖 

> 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟

” in each image pattern is “ 𝑥 𝑖  

> 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟

= 1.0.”15 

For example, in the Color -Cue Ball, the QR -code image that the 0th neuron has been learning has presented 

to the Recall Net, and the  output values of the 0th to 6th neurons have examined.  In this case, the intermediate 

output value “ 𝑞 0𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 ” of the 0th neuron learned has been the largest, and all other values  have been smaller 

than this.  Similarly, we presented the pattern image learned by the first cue neuron for the Shape -Cue Ball, 

the pattern image learned by the second cue neuron for the Volume -Cue Ball, and the pattern image learned 

by the third cue neuron for the Spectacular View -Cue  Ball to the corresponding Recall Net, and examined the 

output values  of all cue neurons for each Cue Ball.  The results are shown in Fig. 3. For Constellation -Cue Ball, 

normally, this procedure would involve using the QR code pattern image trained with t he fourth cue neuron, 

but since the results obtained here will be used in a simulation of the subsequent Recall process algorithm, we 

designated the zeroth cue neuron as the trained pattern image and examined the output values  of each cue 

neuron.  The  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  values  when an image different from the pattern image specified above (a cue neuron with 

a different number) was presented for each cue ball are also shown. Note that the data for Figure 3 is shown 

in Table 2. 

## 𝑞 𝑖 

> 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟

cue neuron 

No. 

Color 

Cue Ball 

Shape 

Cue Ball 

Volume 

Cue Ball 

Spectacular View 

Cue Ball 

Constellation 

Cue Ball 

0 72.18  70.75  67.90  70.99  72.65 

1 64.92  74.08  67.06  66.35  66.35 

2 66.59  66.47  74.55  66.11  65.64 

3 66.11  65.99  67.42  73.84  65.52 

4 65.28  66.83  66.83  66.23  65.99 

5 66.11  67.06  68.01  66.47  66.23 

6 66.47  65.99  67.30  67.06  65.76 

Table.2: Output values  of all cue neurons in each Cue Ball in Figure.2.  The output value  𝑞 𝑖  

> 𝑎

of 

each cue ball's cue neuron is shown. Note that the dark red and bold text indicates the maximum 

value. 

As shown in Figure 3, in the Color −Cue Ball, the pre -learned  0 − th cue neuron has output the maximum 

output value  𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 = 72.18 . When the threshold function is applied to this  𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 , the result is “ 𝑥 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 = 1.0 ”, 

which means that the first pattern is recalled as expected, confirming that learning is complete.  In the Shape -

Cue Ball, the  1st  learned cue neuron outpu ts the maximum output value, “ 𝑞 𝑖=1 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒 = 74.08 ”, resulting in 

“𝑥 𝑖=1 𝑆ℎ𝑎𝑝𝑒 = 1.0 ”, which recalls the expected pattern.  Similarly, in the  Volume −Cue Ball , the  2nd  learned cue 

neuron outputs the maximum output value “ 𝑞 𝑖=2 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 = 74.55 ”,  resulting in “ 𝑥 𝑖=2 𝑉𝑜𝑙𝑢𝑚𝑒 = 1.0 ”, and in the 

Spectacular View −Cue Ball  -Cue Ball, the  3rd  learned cue neuron outputs the maximum output value 

“𝑞 𝑖=3 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑢𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑉𝑖𝑒𝑤 = 73.84 ”, resulting in “ 𝑥 𝑖=3 𝑆𝑝𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑎𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑟 𝑉𝑖𝑒𝑤 = 1.0 ”, wh ich recalls the expected pattern.  In 16 

Constellation −Cue Ball, the  0th  learned cue neuron is specified, and this cue neuron outputs the maximum 

output value, “ 𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 72.65 ”, resulting in “ 𝑥 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 1.0 ”, which  recalls the first pattern as 

expected.  Based on these simulation results, the maximum value of  𝑞 𝑖 𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟  across the five types of learned cue 

neurons exceeds 72.0; therefore, the threshold used in each algorithm has set to “ 𝐷 = 72.0 .”  As a side note ,

wh en the 4th learned cue neuron is specified for the Constellation -Cue Ball, it produces an output of 

“𝑞 𝑖=4 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 72.89 ”, resulting in “ 𝑥 𝑖=4 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 1.0 .” 

Finally, let's run Recall Algorithm 4. As shown in Algorithm 3, two learning series are performed for each 

groups  (cms=1,2).  For cmb = 0, it is assumed that, in response to the output of the 0th cue neuron of the Color -

Cue Ball, the 1st and 4th cue neurons  among all cue neurons of the Shape -Cue Ball produce outputs.  Following 

this, the 2nd and 3rd cue neurons of the Volume -Cue Ball are assumed to be recalled, followed by the 3rd and 

2nd cue neurons of the Spectacular View -Cue Ball, and finally the 4th and 1 st cue neurons of the Constellation -

Cue Ball, resulting in a chain of recall events.  A similar procedure is applied to the second series. These 

procedures are summarized in Table 3. 

cmb=0  The Starting Cue Ball :  𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 

Learning 

series  Cue Ball  𝑪𝒐𝒍𝒐𝒓  𝑺𝒉𝒂𝒑𝒆  𝑽𝒐𝒍𝒖𝒎𝒆  𝑺𝒑𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒂𝒄𝒖𝒍𝒂𝒓 

𝑽𝒊𝒆𝒘  𝑪𝒐 𝒏𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒍𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏 

Serise1  Learning 

cue neurons  0th ⇒

1st ⇒ 2nd ⇒ 3rd ⇒ 4th 

Serise2  4th ⇒ 3rd ⇒ 2nd ⇒ 1st 

cmb=1  The Starting Cue Ball :  𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑠 

Learning 

series  Cue Ball  𝑪𝒐 𝒏𝒔𝒕𝒆𝒍𝒍𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏  𝑺𝒑𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒂𝒄𝒖𝒍𝒂𝒓 

𝑽𝒊𝒆𝒘  𝑽𝒐𝒍𝒖𝒎𝒆  𝑺𝒉𝒂𝒑𝒆  𝑪𝒐 𝒍𝒐𝒓 

Serise1  Learning 

cue neurons  0th ⇒ 6th ⇒ 5th ⇒ 4th ⇒ 3rd 

Serise2  3rd ⇒ 4th ⇒ 5th ⇒ 6th 

Table.3: Two groups (cmb=0,  1) of recall process and each series.  For both cmb = 0 and cmb = 1, the outputs 

of the learned cue neurons within each of the five Cue Balls are transmitted sequentially.  For example, if 

cmb = 0, a learned QR code pattern image  is presented to the recall net corresponding to the color cue ball. 

In this case, the 0th cue neuron, which is training the presented image, generates an output.  Then, based on 

the output of this cue neuron, the first and fourth cue neurons of Shape -Cue Ba ll output.  Repeat the same 

process until you reach the  Constellation −Cue Ball. Execute the same for “cmb=1.” 

The cue ball groups to be chained are cmb = 0 and cmb = 1, and these two groups are executed in sequence. 

For the cmb = 0 group, the learned QR  code pattern image is first presented to the Color −Cue Ball, and the 

outputs of all cue neurons in this Cue Ball are examined.  At this case, the learned 0th cue neuron has an 

output, with an intermediate output of “ 𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 = 72.18 ” and a final outpu t of “ 𝑥 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 = 1.0 .”  This output 

causes outputs in the  1st  and  4th  learned cue neurons of Shape −Cue Ball.  Furthermore, if we use this output 

and apply the same procedure as above, the  2nd  and  3rd  cue neurons of the Volume −Cue Ball, the  3rd  and 17 

2nd  cue neurons of the Spectacular View −Cue Ball, and the  4th  and  1st  cue neurons of the Constellation −Cue 

Ball output in that order.  The same procedure is subsequently applied to the cmb = 1 group.  First, the learned 

QR code pattern image is presented to the  Constellation −Cue Ball, and the outputs of all cue neurons in this 

Cue Ball are examined.  At this stage, the learned 0th cue neuron has an output, with an intermediate output 

of “ 𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 72.65 ” and a final output of “ 𝑥 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 1.0 .”  In this case, the output of the 0th cue 

neuron, learned in the same way as “ cmb = 0 ” is the intermediate output “ 𝑞 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 72.65 ” and the final 

output “ 𝑥 𝑖=0 𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑙𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 = 1.0 .”  Furthermore, if we use this output and apply the same procedure as above, the 

6th and 3r cue neurons of the  Spectacular View −Cue Ball, the 5th and 4th cue neurons of the Volume −Cue 

Ball, 4th and 5th cue neurons of the Shape -Cue Ball and the 2nd and 6th cue  neurons of the Color −Cue Ball 

output in that order. 18                 

> Figure .4: The chain output of t he leaned cue neurons for each Cue B all. The top
> row is the “cmb=0 ”group, and the bottom row is the cmb=1 group. When “cmb
> = 0”, when a QR code pattern image corresponding to a colored Cue Ball is
> presented to the recall net, the cue neuron learning this image has outputted
> “𝑞 𝑖 =0
> 𝐶𝑜𝑙𝑜𝑟 =72 .18 .” This output causes the Shape −Cue Ball's learned 1st and 4th
> cue neurons to be output. Using the output values of these two cue neurons, we
> can confirm the outputs of the 2nd and 3rd cue neurons learned by Volume -Cue
> Ball. Similarly, the Spectacular -Cue Ball outputs the lea rned cue neurons 2nd
> and 3rd, followed by the Constellation -Cue Ball’s learned cue neurons 1s t and
> 4th. The results of a similar treatment with “cmb=1” are also shown. Also, the
> output values 100 and 110 at the top of each graph correspond to learning
> coefficients 𝜃 of 100 and 110, respectively.

The simulation results show that when a trained  QR code pattern image is presented to the cue neuron of the 

first Cue Ball, subsequent learned images are recalled in a chain reaction. In other words, ( 1 + 4 × 2 ) cue 

neurons respond, recalling nine different images.  The above sim ulation process has two  types, “ cmb = 0, 1 ”,

so ultimately  “9 types of images  × 2 groups = 18 types of images”  will be displayed.  Also, all cue neurons that 

showed large outputs were cue neurons learned in this simulation.  Furthermore, for each cmb, two learning 

sequences were perf ormed, and accordingly the learning coefficient  𝜃  has been set separately to 100 and 110. 

When the learning coefficient θ has been 100, all learned cue neurons that have been associatively recalled 

except for the starting cue neuron have been 100, and  when θ has been 110, all have been 110.  In addition, the 

outputs of all other unlearned cue neurons have been 0.  This has confirmed that all learning and recall 

processes are functioning as expected. 

4.  Conclusions and Discussions 

In this paper, we  introduced a neural network model of associative memory [3 -9] that can learn attributes 

as images and continuously recall multiple learned memories.  Basically, this model has extended the previous 

attribute -specific associative memory neural network model  [1] by increasing the number of attributes 

considered and allowing for further connections between attributes.  Therefore, t he basic configuration of the 

model is the conventional CB -RN system [1] [10].  The number of linked attributes considered here was  set to 

5 based on reports that humans can associate approximately five memories at a time [31 –34].  To represent 

attributes, the name of the attribute element has been treated as a QR -code pattern image.  The  provided 

attribute types consist of five systems:  the C.CB -RN system for processing color (Color), the S.CB -RN for shape 

(Shape), the V.CB -RN for volume (Volume), the SV.CB -RN for processing the names of spectacular views 

(Spectacular View), and the CN.CB -RN for processing constellation names (Constellat ion).  Each attribute is 

composed of seven attribute elements. Although there is no particular limitation on increasing the number of 

attribute elements or even the number of attributes, we consider the present configuration to be sufficient for 

an experime ntal model.  In this model, representing attribute element names and related information as QR -19 

code pattern images offers the advantage of dramatically expanding the range of possible applications. 

Furthermore, subtle tastes, odors, and other sensory percep tions can also be represented within this 

framework.  In the simulation, the neurons in each Cue Ball and Recall Net have been learned using QR -code 

pattern images (digital data), and moreover further learning has been performed between cue neurons of 

diffe rent Cue Balls.  As a result, when a QR -code pattern image was presented to the recall neuron group of 

one Recall Net, the learned cue neurons responded, and it was confirmed that the learned cue neurons in 

different Cue Balls then responded one after  another.  As a result, the pattern images of the learned QR -codes 

are displayed on the relevant Recall Nets.  In addition, for each cmb group, two learning sequences were 

executed with different learning coefficients  𝜃  (100 and 110), resulting in difference s in the output values of 

the learned cue neurons.  When the learning coefficient  𝜃  was set to 100, the output values of all associatively 

recalled learned cue neurons —excluding the  origin  cue neuron —were 100; when  𝜃  was set to 110, all such 

output values  were 110.  It is thought that this difference in output value can be used to  determine the strength 

of recollection. 

In general, it is believed that human associative memory operates such that recalling one item triggers the 

successive recall of related  memories.  We consider the brain repeatedly performs learning based on memory 

data accumulated in this manner.  Also, memory recall appears to be closely related to imagery.  From this 

perspective, research into the mechanisms of memory, especially image reca ll, is considered to be a very 

important field.  In the associative memory model based on neural networks presented in this paper, 

presenting a learned image enables the successive recall of related images in a manner analogous to human 

memory processing [3 , 6 –9, 28 –29].  Therefore, we believe that the model presented here captures some aspects 

of the mechanisms of human memory and recall.  In this paper, we standardized the size (pixel dimensions) of 

QR code pattern images, but in reality, image sizes are  generally non -uniform. In future research, we would 

like to consider how to deal with such cases. 20 

References 

[1]  Inazawa,  H., “ Associative Memory using Attribute -Specific Neuron Groups -1: Learning between Multiple 

Cue Balls ”,  arXiv:  2512.02319,  https://arxiv.org/abs/2512.02319 , 2025. 

[2]  DENSO WAVE. "QR Code". Available at:  https://www.denso -wave.com/qrcode/ 

[3]  Kohonen, T., Correlation “Matrix Memories”, 

IE EE Trans., C -21,  353 -359. , 1972. 

Kohonen, T., “ 

Self -Organization and Associative Memory ”, Springer, 1984. 

[4]  Anderson, J.R and Bower, G.H., “ 

Human Associative Memory ”, Psychology Press, 1974. 

[5]  Nakano, K., 

Learning Process in a Model of Associative Memory , Spri nger, 1971. 

[6]  Amari, S. & Maginu, K., “Statistical Neurodynamics of Associative Memory”. 

Neural Networks, Vol. 1, 

63 -73, 1988. 

[7]  Hopfield, J.J. “Neural Networks and Physical Systems with Emergent Collective Computational 

Abilities”, 

Proc. of the National  Academy of Science USA 79  : 1982 2254 -2258, 1982 ; 

Hopfield JJ, Tank DW , Neural computation of decisions in optimization problems. Biol . Cybern . 52:141 –

152, 1985. 

[8]  Yoshizawa, S., Morita, M. &  Amari, S. “Capacity of Associative Memory Using a Nonmonotonic Neuron 

Model”, 

Neural Networks, Vol. 6,  167 -176, 1993. 

[9]  Amit, D.J., Gutfreund, H. & Sompolinsky, H. “Storing Infinite Numbers of Patterns in a Spin -Glass Model 

of Neural Networks”, 

Phys. Rev. L ett., 55,  1530 -1533, 1985. 

[10]  Inazawa, H. , “Hetero -Correlation -Associative Memory with Trigger Neurons: Accumulation of Memory 

through Additional Learning in Neural Networks”, Complex Systems, 27, Issue 2, 187 -197, 2018. 

Inazawa, H., “Associative Memory Model  with Neural Networks: Memorizing multiple images with one 

neuron”. arXiv: 2510.06542,  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2510.06542 , 2025. 

Inazawa, H., “The Method for Storing Patterns in Neural Networks -Memorization and Recall of QR code 

Patterns -”. arXiv:  2504.06631 , https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2504.06631 , 2025. 

Inazawa, H., “ An associative memory model with very high memory rate: Image storage by sequential 

addition learning”. arXiv: 2210.03893,  https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2210.03893 , 2022. 

[11]  Hinton, G.E. & Salakhutdinov, R. Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with Neural Networks. 

Science, 

Vol. 313 , 504 -507, 2006. 

[12]  Hinton, G.E., Osindero, S. &  Teh, Y. A., “Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets”, 

Neural 

Computation, 18 : 1527 -1544, 2006. 

[13]  Bengio, Y., Lamblin, P., Popovici, D. & Larochelle, H., “Greedy Layer -Wise Training of Deep Networks”. In Proc. NIPS,  2006. 

[14]  Lee, H., Grosse, R., Ranganat h, R. & Ng, A.Y., “Convolutional Deep Breif Networks for Scalable 21 

Unsupervised Learning of Hierarchical Representations”. 

In Proc. ICML,  2009. 

[15]  Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G.E., “ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural 

Networks”. 

In Proc. NIPS,  2012. 

[16]  Le, Q.V., Ranzato, M., Monga, R., Devin, M., Chen, K., Corrado, G.S., Dean, J. & Ng, A.Y., “Building High -

Level Features Using Large Scale Unsupervised Learning” 

. In Proc. ICML,  2012. 

[17]  Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Hinton, G.E., “Ima geNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural 

Networks”. 

In Proc. NIPS,  2012. 

[18]  Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A.N., Kaiser, L. and Polosukhin, I., 

"Attention Is All You Need",  Advances in Neural Information Proc essing Systems.  2017. 

[19]  J.W. Rae, A.  Potapenko, S.M. Jayakumar and T. Lillicrap, “ 

Compressive Transformers for Long -Range 

Sequence Modeling ”,  ICLR (International Conference on Learning Representations) , 2020. 

[20]  Rumelhart, D.E., McCleland, J.L. &  the PDP Research Group, “Parallel Distributed Processing: Explorations in the Microstructure of Cognition”, Vol. 1: Foundations. Cambridge: MIT Press,  1986. 

[21]  Fukushima, K. & Miyake, S. “Neocognitron: A new Algorithm for Pattern Recognition Tolerant of 

Defo rmations and Shifts in Position”, 

Pattern Recognition, 15 : 455 -469, 1982. 

[22]  Widrow, B. & Hoff, M.E., “Adaptive Switching Circuits”, 

In 1960 IRE WESCON Convention Record, Part 

4,  96 -104. 

New York: IRE. Reprinted in Anderson and Rosenfeld [1988],  1960. 

[23]  Rescorla, R.A. & Wagner, A.R., “A Theory of Pavlovian  Conditioning:  The Effectiveness of Reinforcement 

and Nonreinforcement”. 

In classical Conditioning II: Current Research and Theory, eds. Bloch, A.H. & 

Prokasy, W.F., 64 -69, New York: Appleton -Century -Crofts,  1972. 

[24]  LeCun, Y., Boser, B., Denker, J.S., Henderson, D., Howard, R.E., Hubard, W. & Jackel, L.D. 

“Backpropagation Applied to Handwritten Zip Code Recognition. Neural Computation”, 1(4):  541 -551, 

198 9. 

[25]  Tsutsumi, K., “Cross -Coupled Hopfield Nets via Generalized -Delta -Rule -Based internetworks” 

In Proc. 

IJCNN90 -San Diego II,  259 -265,  1990. 

[26]  Simard, P.Y., Steinkraus, D. & Platt, J. “Best Practice for Convolutional Neural Networks Applied to 

Visual Document  Analysis”, 

In Proc. ICDAR,  2003. 

[27]  LeCun , Y, Bottou, L., Bengio, Y. & Haffner, P. “Gradient -Based Learning Applied to Document 

Recognition”, 

Proceedings of the IEEE, 86(11):  2278 -2324, 1998. 

[28]  Srebro, N. & Shraibman, A. Rank, “Trace -Norm and Max -Norm”, 

In Proc. 18th Annual Conference on 

Learning Theory, COLT 2005,  545 -560, Springer, 2005. 

[29]  Srivastava, N., Hinton, G.E., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I. & Salakhutdinov, R., “Dropout: A Simple Way 22 

to Prevent Neural Networks from Overfitting”, Journal of Machine  Learning Research, 15: 1929 -1958, 

2014. 

[30]  Marcella Cornia, Matteo Stefanini, Lorenzo Baraldi, Rita Cucchiara, “ Meshed -Memory Transformer for 

Image Captioning”, arXiv:1912.08226,  https://doi.org/10.48 550/arXiv.1912.08226 , 2020. 

[31]  Cowan, N.,  “The Magical Mystery Four: How is Working Memory Capacity Limited? ”, Current 

Directions in Psychological Science, 2010. 

[32]  Oberauer, K., et al.,  “When Does Episodic Memory Contribute to Perf ormance in Working Memory 

Tasks ?” , Journal of Cognition,  2023. 

[33]  Steinberg, J.,  “Associative memory of structured knowledge ”,  Scientific Reports,  2022 .

[34]  Guardia, T., et al.,  “Associative memory is more strongly predicted by age -related differences in the 

prefrontal cortex than medial  temporal lobes”,  NeuroImage: Reports,  2023. 23 

Appendix 

All QR -code pattern images used in this paper are shown below.  The numbers at the top of the image (such as 

0th) are the numbers of the corresponding cue neurons.  The file name (e.g., “ red ”) at  the bottom of each pattern, 

excluding the extension, is the string saved as the QR -code image pattern. 

Attributes  Members in  Color －Cue Ball 

0th  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th 

red.bmp  orangae.bmp  yellow.bmp  green.bmp  blue.bmp  indigo.bmp  purple.bm 

Attributes  Members in  Shape －Cue Ball 

0th  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th 

square.bmp  circle.bmp  oval.bmp  Rectangle 

> .bmp
> Trapezoid
> .bmp

Triangle 

.bmp  rhombus.bm 

Attributes  Members in Volume －Cue Ball 

0th  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th 

extra -

large.bmp  large.bmp  medium.bmp  small -

medium.bmp  small.bmp  extra -

small.bmp  mini.bm 

Attributes  Members in  Spectacular View －Cue Ball 

0th  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th 

Iguazu.bmp  Maunakea 

.bmp 

Milford 

Sound .bmp 

Monument 

VY. bmp  Rockies.bmp  Tekapo.bmp  Yellowknife 

.bmp 

Attributes  Members in  Constellation －Cue Ball 

0th  1st  2nd  3rd  4th  5th  6th 

Andromeda 

.bmp 

Aquarius 

.bmp 

Cassiopeia 

.bmp 

Centaurus 

.bmp  Cygnus.bmp  Orion.bmp  Perseus.bmp