Title: Graph Vector Field: A Unified Framework for Multimodal Health Risk Assessment from Heterogeneous Wearable and Environmental Data Streams

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.28115v1

Published Time: Tue, 31 Mar 2026 01:43:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# Graph Vector Field: A Unified Framework for Multimodal Health Risk Assessment from Heterogeneous Wearable and Environmental Data Streams 

Silvano Coletti 1,2 and Francesca Fallucchi 11Universit` a degli Studi Guglielmo Marconi, Roma, Italy 

> 2

Chelonia SA, Lugano, Switzerland March 31, 2026 

Abstract 

Digital health research has advanced dynamic graph-based disease models, topological learning on simplicial complexes, and multimodal mixture-of-experts architectures, but these strands remain largely disconnected and do not yet support mechanistically interpretable multimodal risk dynamics. We propose a Graph Vector Field (GVF) framework that models health risk as a vector-valued field evolving on time-varying graphs and simplicial complexes, and that couples discrete differential-geometric operators with modality-structured mixture-of-experts. Individuals, physiological subsystems, and their higher-order interactions form the cells of an underlying complex; risk is represented as a vector-valued cochain whose temporal evolution is parameterised with Hodge Laplacians and discrete exterior calculus operators. This yields a Helmholtz–Hodge-type decomposition of risk dynamics into potential-driven (exact), circulation-like (coexact), and topologically constrained (harmonic) components, providing a direct link between model terms and interpretable mechanisms of propagation, cyclic behaviour, and persistent modes. Multimodal inputs from wearable sensors, behavioural and environmental context, and clinical or genomic data are incorporated through a bundle-/sheaf-inspired mixture-of-experts architecture, in which modality-specific latent spaces are attached as fibres to the base complex and coupled via learned consistency maps. This construction separates modality-specific from shared contributions to risk evolution and offers a principled route toward modality-level identifiability. GVF integrates geometric dynamical systems, higher-order topology (enforced indirectly via geometric regularisation and Hodge decomposition rather than through the expert forward pass), and structured multimodal fusion into a single framework for interpretable, modality-resolved risk modelling in longitudinal cohorts. The present paper develops the mathematical foundations, architectural design, and formal guarantees of the framework; empirical validation on real-world cohorts is the subject of ongoing work. 

Keywords: Helmholtz–Hodge decomposition, simplicial complex, discrete exterior calculus, mixture-of-experts, multimodal health risk, wearable sensing, vector bundle 

MSC (2020): Primary 68T07; Secondary 55N31, 58A15, 62R40, 92C50 

# 1 Introduction 

The proliferation of wearable devices and connected sensors is transforming how health can be monitored and modelled. Consumer- and medical-grade wearables now act, de facto , as pervasive antennas that continuously transmit high-frequency physiological and behavioural signals, and are increasingly complemented by electronic health records (EHR), environmental 1

> arXiv:2603.28115v1 [cs.LG] 30 Mar 2026

exposures, and genomic information in large longitudinal cohorts [ 9 , 10 ]. Together, these data streams promise a shift from episodic assessment to continuous, multimodal characterisation of individual health trajectories and risk. Current artificial intelligence (AI) methods already exploit parts of this ecosystem: spa-tiotemporal graph neural networks on wearable-derived skeletons and sensor networks for injury risk and health warnings [ 1 , 2, 3]; graph-based models for long-term stress, sleep, and resilience monitoring [ 4 , 5 ]; dynamic diffusion processes on comorbidity graphs learned from EHR [ 6 ]; geo-metric regression on data-driven simplicial complexes using Hodge Laplacians [ 7 ]; and large-scale multimodal fusion or mixture-of-experts (MoE) architectures that integrate EHR, wearables, and imaging [ 9, 10 , 8 ]. However, these advances remain largely fragmented. Most models treat risk as an unstructured scalar output or as an abstract latent representation in Euclidean space, provide limited mechanistic insight into how risk propagates over physiological, behavioural, and environmental structures, and do not explicitly disentangle the contributions of heterogeneous modalities. This limitation becomes evident in scenarios where individuals share similar scalar risk scores but differ profoundly in how risk emerges and propagates through their surrounding networks. For one person, elevated risk may be driven by a directed flow from a specific environmental exposure, suggesting source suppression as a primary intervention. For another, comparable aggregate risk may arise from a self-reinforcing cycle involving wearables, behaviour, and context, where no single source can be isolated and cycle-breaking interventions are required instead. Under scalar or unstructured latent models these cases are effectively indistinguishable, even though they are clinically and mechanistically distinct. GVF is designed to address these gaps. It models health risk as a vector-valued field evolving on time-varying simplicial complexes, uses discrete differential-geometric operators (including Hodge–Laplacians) to structure and interpret the dynamics of this field, and embeds multimodal inputs in a bundle-structured mixture-of-experts architecture that separates modality-specific from shared effects. Our contributions are threefold: we provide a geometric and topological substrate for dynamic risk fields that extends graph-based diffusion models to higher-order domains; we define a Hodge-theoretic decomposition of learned risk flows into components with distinct clinical interpretations, naturally linked to different classes of input modality; and we propose a differentiable, bundle-structured expert architecture that jointly learns risk vectors and flow decomposition over a data-driven simplicial complex (constructed via threshold-based filtration guided by persistent homology, not learned end-to-end) while explicitly organising modality-specific and shared contributions. 

# 2 Evolution of AI for Multimodal Health Risk Modelling 

This section reviews recent advances in AI for analysing multimodal health data, with an emphasis on (i) wearable-centric risk prediction, (ii) dynamic graph models of disease progression, (iii) geometric and topological learning, and (iv) multimodal fusion and mixture-of-experts architectures, focusing on how these strands relate to modelling risk dynamics, geometric and topological structure, and modality-aware interpretability. 

2.1 Graph- and sequence-based models for wearable-driven risk 

A first line of work uses wearable sensors as the primary data source and combines temporal models with graph architectures. Spatio-temporal graph neural networks (ST-GNNs) have been applied to athletic injury risk prediction by mapping multimodal wearable signals—IMU, sEMG, PPG—onto a dynamic human skeleton graph, where nodes represent joints and edges encode biomechanical relationships [ 1 ]. The ST-GNN captures coupled spatiotemporal patterns in joint kinematics, and federated/meta-learning supports personalised adaptation [ 1 ]. Similarly, 2hybrid LSTM–GNN models over flexible sensor networks have been proposed for real-time health warnings in college sports, integrating multiple physiological time series in a lightweight, edge-computing setting [ 2]. Injury risk prediction frameworks that transform temporal training data into image-like encodings (e.g., Gramian Angular Fields, Markov Transition Fields) and then to graphs also exploit parallel graph and temporal convolutions to capture spatiotemporal structure, supplemented by attention mechanisms to highlight important athlete interactions and training-load features [ 3]. Beyond sports, personalised graph-attention architectures have been used to track long-term changes in maternal sleep and stress from smartwatch and mobile-application data, producing individualised abnormality scores over time [ 4 ]. For mental health, participant-specific graphs where physiological modalities—heart activity, electrodermal activity, motion—are nodes and edges encode inter-signal dependencies have been used with GNNs to classify resilience and stress states, revealing physiological differences between resilience groups [ 5]. GNNs have been applied more broadly to EHR data [ 13 ], brain connectivity [ 14 ], and epidemiological networks [15]. Collectively, these works demonstrate the value of graph-based and sequence-based models for wearable-driven risk and state monitoring [ 1 , 2, 4 , 5, 3 ]. However, they generally implement dynamics implicitly through recurrent or spatiotemporal neural architectures rather than via explicit operators on a structured domain, treat risk as a scalar output or unstructured latent representation, and do not exploit higher-order topological structure or differential-geometric operators for mechanistic interpretation. Dynamic GNNs [ 16 , 17 , 18 ] handle time-varying graphs but produce scalar outputs on pairwise (1-skeleton) graphs, where the curl operator vanishes identically and cyclic risk dynamics are invisible by construction. 

2.2 Dynamic graphs for disease progression 

A complementary line of research focuses on disease progression as a dynamic process on clinical graphs. Deep Diffusion Processes (DDP) model personalised, time-varying comorbidity networks from EHR event data, where diseases are nodes and dynamically weighted edges parameterise the intensity functions of a multidimensional point process over disease-onset times [ 6 ]. Edge weights are modulated over time by a neural network that maps each patient’s history to dynamic influence factors, enabling a decomposition of interaction effects into static pairwise interactions, temporal influence, and dynamic components [ 6 ]. This yields per-disease, time-varying intensity trajectories that can be interpreted as a diffusion-like risk field over a learned, dynamic comorbidity graph. DDP thus provides a clear precedent for framing clinical risk and progression as a dynamic process on a graph with interpretable components [ 6 ]. At the same time, it operates on a disease–disease graph derived from EHR alone, without incorporating wearable, behavioural, or environmental modalities, and without invoking higher-order topology, Hodge-theoretic operators, or explicit geometric decomposition of risk dynamics. 

2.3 Geometric and topological learning in health 

Geometric and topological machine learning have begun to appear in health-related prediction tasks, most notably through the use of simplicial complexes and Hodge Laplacians. The TDA paradigm [ 30 , 31 ] and persistent homology [ 32 , 33 , 34 ] extract topological invariants from data. DEC [ 19 , 22 ] and Hodge theory on graphs [ 20 , 25 ] underpin flow decomposition; HHD on graphs [ 23 , 24 ] has been applied to gene expression and traffic flows [ 35 , 21 ]. Simplicial neural networks [ 36 , 37 ] extend message passing to higher-order complexes but produce scalar outputs. Adaptive Geometric Regression (AGR) constructs a data-driven simplicial complex (e.g., a 

k-NN nerve) over high-dimensional feature spaces, equips it with a learned Riemannian structure and densities on p-simplices, and applies Hodge Laplacians Lp to perform heat diffusion on 

p-cochains [ 7 ]. Spectral filtering of responses and a response-aware geometry that down-weights 3edges spanning large response differences yield diffusion-based features for downstream regression or classification, with motivating examples in microbiome-based prediction of health outcomes such as preterm birth [ 7 ]. AGR is, to our knowledge within this literature set, the most explicit use of simplicial complexes and Hodge operators in a biomedical context [ 7]. Nonetheless, diffusion is employed as an algorithmic regularisation and feature-construction mechanism rather than as a model of time-evolving health risk, and the setting is effectively single-modality—microbiome plus covariates—without multimodal wearable, behavioural, or environmental integration, or dynamical decomposition of risk via Hodge-theoretic components. 

2.4 Multimodal fusion, foundation models, and mixture-of-experts 

A third strand addresses multimodal fusion across EHR, wearables, imaging, and other data sources, with increasing emphasis on scalability and robustness. Large-scale pipelines that combine EHR and consumer wearable data for incident disease prediction have shown that wearable augmentation can yield consistent, statistically significant gains over EHR-only base-lines across a range of conditions [ 9]. These systems typically represent EHR and wearable streams via time-aggregated features or foundation-model embeddings and fuse them through concatenation, weighted concatenation, or feature selection [ 9]. More recent work proposes multimodal foundation models that treat EHR events and wearable time series as observations of a shared continuous-time latent process, using modality-specific encoders and cross-modal pretraining objectives to align dense physiological signals with sparse clinical events [ 10 ]. This design improves physiological-state estimation, clinical event forecasting, and time-to-event risk prediction, and addresses challenges such as asynchronous sampling and modality-specific missingness [10]. In parallel, mixture-of-experts (MoE) architectures have been introduced for robust mul-timodal clinical prediction. MoE-Health employs modality-specific encoders (e.g., for EHR and chest radiography), learns modality-specific missingness embeddings, and routes fused representations through experts specialised to different modality subsets via a dynamic gating mechanism [ 8]. This structure improves performance and robustness under varying patterns of missing modalities [ 8 ]. These multimodal approaches establish that fusing wearables with EHR improves predictive performance at scale [ 9 , 10 ] and that modality-structured architectures such as MoE can enhance robustness to incomplete data [ 8 ]. However, they generally operate in unstructured Euclidean latent spaces, without an explicit geometric or topological domain for risk, without Hodge/DEC-based operators, and without a formal sheaf/bundle perspective or identifiability analysis that would separate and interpret modality-specific contributions over a structured base space. Neural Sheaf Diffusion [ 42 ], Bundle Neural Networks [ 41 ], and Bundle Morphism Networks [ 43 ]introduce geometric structure into GNNs via sheaf or bundle assignments over graph edges, but operate on pairwise graphs (trivial curl) and use bundle structure for equivariance or expressivity rather than modality identifiability; none applies Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition to the learned field. Across these four strands, contemporary AI for multimodal health risk has progressed from spatiotemporal GNNs on wearable-derived graphs [ 1, 2, 4, 5, 3], through dynamic diffusion-like processes on comorbidity networks [ 6], Hodge-Laplacian-based geometric regression on simplicial complexes [ 7], to large-scale multimodal fusion via foundation models and mixture-of-experts [ 9, 10 , 8]. Yet no existing work jointly (i) models multimodal health risk as a vector-valued field on time-varying graphs or simplicial complexes, (ii) uses discrete differential-geometric operators to decompose and interpret the dynamics of that field, and (iii) embeds these dynamics in a bundle-/sheaf-structured mixture-of-experts architecture aimed at modality-level separation and identifiability. This is the gap that GVF is designed to address, as developed in the sections that follow. 43 Mathematical Substrate 

3.1 From Pairwise Graph to Simplicial Complex 

Standard dynamic graph representations of sensor networks capture pairwise interactions but fail to represent fundamentally higher-order relationships: compound exposure events involving an agent, a spatial cell, and an environmental sensor simultaneously; triadic physiological interactions with non-additive effects; or clinical co-morbidity clusters requiring three-entity modelling. These are 2-simplices , not edges, and their inclusion is necessary for the curl operator (Section 3.2) to be non-trivially defined and for the HHD (Theorem 5.4) to capture cyclic risk dynamics. 

Definition 3.1 (Multimodal Interaction Simplicial Complex K(t)) . Let K(t) be an abstract simplicial complex [27, 28] over the vertex set V (t) = V A(t) ∪ V S ∪ V E (t) ∪ V X , where: 

• V A(t): mobile agents bearing wearable devices; 

• V S : static spatial cells (geographic tessellation); 

• V E (t): environmental sensor nodes (air quality, temperature, light, noise); 

• V X : optional external data nodes (EHR systems, genomic databases, surveillance feeds). Simplices are typed by interaction order: 

• 1-simplices {u, v }: pairwise interactions (proximity, co-location, agent-sensor exposure); 

• 2-simplices {u, v, w }: simultaneous triadic interactions (compound exposure, tripartite co-location); 

• 3-simplices : quaternary high-order compound events. The 1-skeleton of K(t) reduces to a standard dynamic graph, recovering prior GNN-based approaches as special cases. 

3.2 Discrete Exterior Calculus Operators 

We equip K(t) with the standard DEC structure of chain groups, boundary operators, and their dual coboundary operators; see [19, 20] for the full algebraic development. 

Inner product and Hodge star We use the standard combinatorial inner product on 

k-cochains: for α, β ∈ Ck(K; R), 

⟨α, β ⟩k = X 

> σk∈K

α(σk) β(σk) (1) i.e. the identity Hodge star ⋆ = I (unweighted DEC), the standard choice in discrete Hodge theory [ 21 , 20 ]. Under this inner product the gradient and divergence are mutually ad-joint, the HHD components are L2-orthogonal (Theorem 5.4), and the operator norm satisfies 

∥curl K∥C1→C2 = ∥B⊤ 

> 2

∥2 ≤ √dmax where dmax is the maximum number of 2-simplices containing any edge (relevant for the Lgeo bound in Section 6). We assume the standard structure of unweighted Discrete Exterior Calculus (DEC) [ 19 , 20 ]. Specifically, we define the discrete gradient ∇K = B⊤ 

> 1

⊗Im, the discrete divergence div K = B1 ⊗Im,and the discrete curl curl K = B⊤ 

> 2

⊗ Im, where B1 and B2 are the signed node-edge and edge-face incidence matrices of the complex. The Hodge Laplacians are ∆ 0 = B1B⊤ 

> 1

⊗ Im and ∆1 = B⊤ 

> 1

B1 ⊗ Im + B2B⊤ 

> 2

⊗ Im (standard spectral theory [ 29 , 20 , 25 ]); the identity curl K ◦ ∇ K = 0 follows from B1B2 = 0 [19]. 5Remark 3.2 . On a pure graph (1-skeleton), curl K ≡ 0 structurally: no triangular faces exist on which circulation is defined. The curl operator is non-trivially defined only when K(t) contains 2-simplices. This is the structural—not merely notational—necessity for the cyclic risk detection capability of GVF. 

3.3 Constructing Simplicial Complexes from Multimodal Health Data 

Translating heterogeneous clinical and sensor streams into a mathematically rigorous simplicial complex K(t) requires mapping physical and biological interactions to geometric structures. The three simplex orders correspond to qualitatively distinct interaction regimes. 

0-simplices (nodes) Represent atomic entities: a patient wearing a smartwatch ( vi ∈ V A), a stationary air quality monitor in a hospital room ( ve ∈ V E ), or a static Electronic Health Record entry ( vx ∈ V X ). 

1-simplices (edges) Capture pairwise, first-order interactions. An edge {vi, v j } may represent spatial proximity measured via Bluetooth RSSI between two patients, while {vi, v e} represents a patient’s direct exposure to an environmental sensor. 

2-simplices (triangles) and biological justification Standard pairwise graphs fail to capture irreducible triadic interactions, which are pervasive in health data. Consider the “Gene-Environment-Phenotype” interaction: if patient vi carries a specific genomic vulnerability (vx), occupies a high-stress ward environment ( ve), and interacts with an infectious vector (vj ), the resulting risk is often non-additive . The 2-simplex {vi, v e, v x} geometrically encodes this higher-order compounding effect. Only by closing this triad can the DEC curl operator (Theorem 3.2) non-trivially compute circulation, effectively modelling a self-reinforcing biological or environmental feedback loop that cannot be deduced by observing the pairwise edges in isolation. 

Practical construction from raw streams Translating raw, asynchronous sensor streams into a mathematically rigorous complex K(t) requires a formal pipeline comprising temporal windowing, heterogeneous edge formation, and multimodal simplex inclusion. 

(1) Temporal windowing. Raw data S(t) are not evaluated instantaneously but aggregated over a discrete sliding window of duration ∆ t (e.g. ∆ t = 5 minutes for physiological and environmental streams, or 24 hours for behavioural streams). The complex K(t) is static within the interval [ t, t + ∆ t) and updates discontinuously, ensuring the DEC operators remain well-defined across stable epochs. 

(2) Heterogeneous edge formation. Because multimodal nodes do not inhabit a uniform metric space, standard spatial distance functions are insufficient. We define modality-specific adjacency thresholds τ :

• Agent–agent edges: {vAi , v Aj } is formed if spatial proximity (median Bluetooth RSSI over ∆t) exceeds τprox , or if physiological synchrony (e.g. dynamic time-warping distance of HRV signals) falls below τsync .

• Agent–environment edges: {vAi , v Ee } is formed if agent vi spends at least τdwell minutes within the active geographical radius Re of sensor ve.

• Agent–external edges: {vAi , v Xx } is a static edge formed when clinical conditions (e.g. a specific genomic marker present in the EHR) are met. 

(3) Multimodal simplex inclusion criteria. A standard Vietoris-Rips complex relies on purely pairwise distance metrics, which fails for heterogeneous topologies. Instead, we define 6a rule-based multimodal filtration . A 2-simplex σ2 = {vi, v j , v k} is included in K(t) if and only if all three bounding 1-simplices are active and at least two distinct node types are present in the triad. For example, the 2-simplex {vAi , v Aj , v Ee } (two patients and one environmental sensor) forms when vi and vj are physically proximate and both are simultaneously exposed to the same environmental hazard ve. This strict inclusion criterion prevents combinatorial explosion of trivial simplices (e.g. three patients near each other without a shared contextual risk) and ensures the curl operator explicitly captures cross-modality cyclic dynamics. The resulting K(t) is updated at each observation window, yielding a time-varying complex whose topology ( β1(K(t)), the first Betti number [ 32 , 33 , 34 ]) directly informs the harmonic component of GVF. The construction proceeds in two phases: Phase 1 forms the 1-skeleton via modality-specific adjacency thresholds ( τprox , τ sync , τ dwell ); Phase 2 applies multimodal filtration to close triangles only when at least two distinct node types are present. Full algorithmic pseudocode is provided in Section A. 

Parameter selection and topological validation A critical operational challenge is selecting the optimal proximity thresholds (analogous to the filtration parameter ε in standard Vietoris-Rips complexes [ 34 ]). Rather than relying on arbitrary heuristics, GVF selects optimal thresholds via persistent homology [32 , 33 ]. By sweeping each τ across a continuous range, we generate persistence barcodes that track the birth and death of topological features (connected components 

β0 and independent cycles β1). The operational threshold is chosen within the most stable plateau of the persistence diagram—the range where the Betti numbers βk remain invariant, ensuring K(t) captures genuine structural invariants rather than transient noise. 

Computational complexity of construction Phase 1 requires pairwise evaluations bounded by O(|V |2), reduced to O(|V | log |V |) via spatial indexing (KD-trees). Phase 2 runs in O(|K 1| · 

dmax ), where dmax is the maximum node degree in the sparse 1-skeleton, keeping temporal updates tractable for continuous monitoring. 

# 4 GVF Framework Architecture 

Definition 4.1 (Risk Vector Bundle ε(K)) . The risk vector bundle is the direct sum over Nmod 

input modalities: 

ε(K) = ε(1) ⊕ ε(2) ⊕ · · · ⊕ ε(Nmod ) (2) Each summand ε(n) is a trivial vector bundle with fibre Rmn ; the total dimension is m = P 

> n

mn.In the canonical four-modality configuration: εphys (physiological signals), εbeh (behavioural data), εenv (environmental measurements), and εext (optional external sources: EHR, genomic, surveillance). The direct sum structure guarantees that no modality’s risk representation bleeds into another’s architecturally. 

GVF operator as bundle morphism Definition 4.2 (GVF Operator Fθ). The GVF operator is a parameterised map: 

Fθ : Γ  εin (t) × Ξ( K(t)) → Γ( ε(K)) (3) where Γ( εin (t)) is the space of multimodal input state sections, Ξ( K(t)) is the structural representation space of K(t), and Γ( ε(K)) is the output risk section space. Fθ is implemented as a Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture: 

ri(t) = 

> Nmod

X

> n=1

g(n)

> ϕ

 xi(t) F (n)

> θ

 K(t), xi(t) (4) 7where each expert F (n) 

> θ

outputs exclusively in ε(n), and gϕ satisfies P 

> n

g(n) 

> ϕ

= 1, g(n) 

> ϕ

≥ 0. 

Expert architectures To satisfy the Universal Approximation guarantee (Theorem 8.1) and to ensure the curl operator remains non-trivially defined on higher-order interactions (Theorem 3.2), the experts cannot be instantiated as standard pairwise Graph Neural Networks operating on the 1-skeleton. Instead, each expert F (n) 

> θ

must be a variant of a Message Passing Simplicial Network (MPSN) [36], adapted to the temporal inductive biases of its specific modality. Table 1 defines the theoretically aligned architecture for each bundle summand. The specific architectures listed are proposed instantiations of the MPSN template, named here for clarity; their detailed specification and empirical evaluation are part of future implementation work. Table 1: Expert decomposition of Fθ aligned with simplicial UAT requirements.            

> Expert Simplicial Architecture Primary Inputs Temporal Scale
> Physio-Expert Dynamic Simplicial GCN (DS-GCN) HR, HRV, SpO 2, EDA, skin temp Minutes Behav-Expert Simplicial Convolutional RNN (S-CRNN) GPS, sleep staging, activity Hours–days Env-Expert Temporal Simplicial Atten-tion (T-SAT) PM 2.5, temp, noise, UV Minutes Ext-Expert Higher-order / Simplicial Transformer EHR, PRS, surveillance (opt.) Hours–static

Remark 4.3 (Graceful Degradation under Missing Modalities) . When a modality n is unavailable (x(n) → 0), the desired behaviour is g(n) 

> ϕ

(x) → 0, so that the output risk vector degrades gracefully to the subspace spanned by active modalities. This is a design objective enforced via training , not a theorem: modality-dropout augmentation (randomly zeroing each modality’s input block with probability pdrop = 0 .2) trains the gating network gϕ to assign near-zero weight to absent modalities. The architectural direct-sum structure ensures that even if gating is imperfect, the missing expert contributes only through its summand ε(n), and the remaining summands carry a valid, lower-dimensional risk representation. Empirical verification of this property is part of the ablation protocol (Section 9). 

# 5 Helmholtz–Hodge Decomposition 

The Helmholtz–Hodge decomposition is the mechanism through which GVF provides inter-pretability inherently —not as a post-hoc explanation method, but as a fundamental property of the learned field’s differential structure. 

5.1 The Risk Flow Field 

Remark 5.1 (Why HHD requires a separate 1-cochain) . Applying HHD directly to ∇Kr would be trivial: ∇Kr ∈ im (∇K) is exact by construction, so curl K(∇Kr) = 0 (boundary-of-boundary identity), and curl and harmonic components vanish identically. GVF therefore introduces a 

separate learned 1-cochain F ∈ C1(K; Rm) on the edges; HHD is applied to F, which is not constrained to be exact. 

Definition 5.2 (Risk Flow Field F). Given the node-level risk section ri(t) ∈ Rm and edge features eij (t) ∈ Rp (e.g. RSSI, co-location duration, sensor correlation), the risk flow on oriented edge ( i, j ) ∈ K 1(t) is: 

Fij (t) = Ψ ω

 ri(t), rj (t), eij (t) ∈ Rm (5) 8To guarantee the antisymmetry required for a valid 1-cochain, Ψ ω is implemented via an underlying MLP parameterised by ω with an explicit antisymmetrisation step: Ψω

 ri, rj , eij 

 = 12

h

MLP ω

 ri, rj , eij 

 − MLP ω

 rj , ri, −eij 

i

(6) Note on the sign convention: eij is treated as an oriented feature vector associated with the ordered pair ( i, j ), so that eji := −eij by convention. For intrinsically symmetric features (e.g. spatial distance, co-location duration), the negation is a purely algebraic device that ensures Ψω satisfies the antisymmetry constraint; the MLP MLP ω learns to process symmetric inputs identically regardless of sign. For intrinsically directional features (e.g. relative signal strength, airflow direction), the sign carries physical meaning. This construction satisfies: (i) Antisymmetry by design: Ψω(ri, rj , eij ) = −Ψω(rj , ri, −eij ), ensuring orientation con-sistency as a 1-cochain. (ii) Non-exactness by design: The edge features eij (t) parameterise the “conductance” of the risk transmission channel. In an epidemiological proximity network, eij might encode contact duration and indoor ventilation quality: when eij → 0 (agents separated by physical barriers), Fij is attenuated regardless of the magnitudes ∥ri∥, ∥rj ∥. Crucially, this 

non-uniform, edge-dependent modulation ensures F is not trivially exact: the circulation around triangle ( i, j, l ) vanishes only when ϕij = ϕjl = ϕli (uniform weighting), which fails generically for learned Ψ ω.(iii) Gradient special case: when eij is discarded and MLP ω(a, b) = b − a, F = ∇Kr is the exact discrete gradient. This is the degenerate case curl KF = 0; Lgeo (Equation (11)) penalises convergence to this collapse. 

Remark 5.3 (Role of 2-simplices in the learning pipeline) . It is important to clarify where the 2-simplices of K(t) enter the computational pipeline. The expert networks F (n) 

> θ

(Table 1) and the flow constructor Ψ ω (Equation (6)) operate on edges (the 1-skeleton): they produce node-level risk vectors ri and edge-level flows Fij without explicit message passing through 2-simplices. The 2-simplices enter at two subsequent stages: (i) the geometric loss Lgeo (Equation (11)) computes curl KF via the edge-face incidence matrix B2, which exists only when K(t) contains 2-simplices—this term shapes the learned flow during training by penalising degenerate exact fields; (ii) the Helmholtz–Hodge decomposition (Theorem 5.4) uses B2 to separate gradient, curl, and harmonic components at inference time. Thus, 2-simplices influence the learned representation indirectly through the training objective and the post-training decomposition, rather than through the expert forward pass. Upgrading the experts to full simplicial message-passing networks [ 36 ]—which would propagate information directly through 2-simplices during the forward pass—is an architectural improvement discussed in Section 10. 

Theorem 5.4 (Discrete HHD of the Risk Flow Field) . For any risk flow F ∈ C1(K(t); Rm),there exists a unique orthogonal decomposition: 

F = ∇Kφ + curl ∗Kψ + h (7) 

where: 

• φ ∈ C0(K; Rm) solves ∆0φ = div K(F) (gradient/potential component); 

• ψ ∈ C2(K; Rm) solves ∆2ψ = curl K(F) (curl/solenoidal component); 

• h ∈ C1(K; Rm) is the harmonic residual satisfying ∆1h = 0, div Kh = 0, curl Kh = 0.The three components are mutually L2-orthogonal with respect to the inner product induced by the Hodge star on K(t). The curl and harmonic components are generically non-zero because F

is not constrained to lie in im( ∇K).

9Proof. For each coordinate channel k ∈ { 1, . . . , m }, denote by F (k) ∈ C1(K; R) the k-th scalar component of F. The standard discrete Hodge decomposition (see [ 21 ], Theorem 1) gives a unique orthogonal decomposition F (k) = ∇Kφ(k) + curl ∗Kψ(k) + h(k) in each channel independently, where orthogonality is with respect to the combinatorial inner product (1) . Stacking over k

yields the vector-valued decomposition F = ∇Kφ + curl ∗Kψ + h. The L2-orthogonality of the three vector-valued components follows because the inner product on C1(K; Rm) decomposes as 

⟨A, B⟩ = Pmk=1 ⟨A(k), B (k)⟩1, so cross-terms vanish channel-by-channel. 

5.2 Mechanistic Interpretation and Monitoring Scores 

Table 2 summarises the mechanistic interpretation of each HHD component and its corresponding intervention target. This interpretability is inherent to the field structure , not a post-hoc explanation: it arises directly from the orthogonal decomposition guaranteed by Theorem 5.4. Table 2: HHD components with mechanistic interpretation and intervention strategy.                                        

> Component Property Mechanistic Meaning Intervention
> ∇Kφ(Gradi-ent) curl K(∇Kφ) = 0Risk flows directionally along a potential gradient. Identifies sources (emitting nodes) and sinks (accumu-lating nodes). Reduce source intensity (e.g., lower environmental exposure, improve physi-ological recovery). curl ∗Kψ(Curl) div K(curl ∗Kψ)=
> 0
> Risk circulates in self-sustaining closed loops. Signature of cyclic coupling (e.g., sleep-stress-recovery loops). Break the cycle at its weakest link (sleep hy-giene, pharmacological disruption).
> h(Harmonic) ∆1h=0Risk locked by global net-work topology. Dimen-sion = β1(K(t)). Not re-ducible by local interven-tions. Structural intervention: modify network topology.

Modality-component correspondence The three HHD components do not merely decom-pose the risk field mathematically: they correspond to structurally distinct classes of input modality , each best modelled by a different type of physical signal. This correspondence, summarised in Table 3, is not an empirical observation but a design hypothesis grounded in the mathematical roles that clinical/genomic, wearable, and environmental data play in the bundle-structured GVF architecture. This tripartite correspondence has a direct clinical translation: gradient-dominant risk calls for clinical or pharmacological intervention targeting the constitutive source; curl-dominant risk calls for behavioural or physiological cycle-breaking strategies (e.g., sleep-hygiene protocols, activity scheduling); harmonic-dominant risk calls for structural or environmental redesign (e.g., modifying spatial exposure topology, installing environmental barriers). The correspondence is formally grounded in the direct-sum bundle structure of Section 4: modality n maps exclusively into fibre ε(n)(K), and the MoE gating weights g(n) 

> ϕ

(xi) in Equation (4) directly control the relative energy contributed by each fibre to each HHD component. The relationship between fibre energy and component energy is made explicit via the orthogonality of the decomposition (Theorem 5.4) and the modality identifiability guarantee (Theorem 7.1). 

Derived monitoring scores Two scalar summary statistics are derived directly from the decomposition, replacing a single alarm scalar with a two-dimensional, complementary warning 10 Table 3: Natural correspondence between HHD components and modality classes. Each modality class contributes most directly to one geometric mode of risk; the contribution is not exclusive but reflects the structural role of each data type. To the best of our knowledge, no prior framework establishes this correspondence (cf. [6, 7, 8]). 

HHD Compo-nent Modality Class Structural Role Why this correspon-dence 

∇Kφ

(Gradient / ex-act) Clinical & genomic (X ext )Scalar potential φ encodes baseline, constitutive risk: fixed biological or clinical state driving a directional outflow. Clinical scores and ge-nomic risk factors de-fine a baseline po-tential landscape that changes slowly and governs the direction of risk flow. curl ∗Kψ

(Curl / co-exact) Wearable & be-havioural (X phys , X beh )Stream function ψ en-codes dynamic, oscillatory coupling: physiological cycles (sleep-wake, HRV rhythm, activity-rest) gen-erate closed-loop risk cir-culation. Wearable time series directly observe cycli-cal physiological dy-namics; their high tem-poral resolution makes them the natural car-rier of the curl compo-nent. 

h

(Harmonic) Environmental (X env )Topology-locked risk deter-mined by the global struc-ture of K(t), which is built from spatial co-presence, dwell times, and sensor ad-jacency. The complex topol-ogy itself—driven by environmental sensor placement, spatial proximity, and shared exposure zones—determines the harmonic dimension 

β1(K(t)) and hence the harmonic risk subspace. 

11 signal. 

Definition 5.5 (Disease Progression Score and Cyclic Risk Index) . Let F = ∇Kφ + curl ∗Kψ + h

be the HHD of the risk flow field (Theorem 5.4). Let u(n) ∈ Rmn be a learnable unit risk axis for modality n, trained jointly with θ and ω (initialised to 1/√mn). For agent i at time 

t, modality weights wn > 0, P 

> n

wn = 1, and letting Ti = {τ ∈ K 2 : i ∈ ∂τ } be the set of 2-simplices incident to agent i:DPS i(t) = X

> n

wn (div KF(n))i(t), u(n) (8) CRI i(t) = 1max( |T i|, 1) 

X 

> τ∈T i

(curl KF)τ (t) (9) 

DPS (signed, basis-invariant). DPS i is a signed scalar: the inner product of the divergence vector with the learnable risk axis u(n), invariant to rotations within ε(n) that fix u(n). DPS i > 0: net outflow (source; deteriorating). DPS i < 0: net inflow (sink; absorbing ambient risk). 

CRI (non-negative, normalised). CRI i ≥ 0 is the mean curl magnitude over incident 2-simplices, normalised by neighbourhood size |T i| to prevent inflation in dense subgraphs. By the discrete Stokes theorem [ 19 ], a non-zero curl KF over a neighbourhood implies non-zero boundary circulation: risk genuinely circulates around closed paths. CRI i > 0 therefore indicates the presence and average intensity of cyclic risk dynamics in i’s neighbourhood; it is non-signed 

(cycles have no orientation in this context) and its magnitude is not interpreted as clinical severity (see Section 6 on Lgeo ). Together, ( DPS i, CRI i) constitute a two-dimensional, complementary warning signal: DPS i

captures directional flow along the risk axis; CRI i captures self-sustaining cyclic dynamics independent of direction. 

Worked example: harmonic component and structural intervention The harmonic residual h satisfies ∆ 1h = 0 and its dimension strictly equals β1(K(t))—the number of in-dependent topological “holes” in the complex, computable via persistent homology [ 32 , 33 ]. Consider a hospital ward where β1(K) = 2. These two topological cycles might correspond to shared, unsegmented HVAC pathways linking subsets of rooms without central filtration. If the framework identifies a high magnitude of risk flow trapped in the harmonic component h around these loops, it implies topology-locked risk .Mechanistically, this means that treating Patient X individually (a node-level intervention) or isolating a single pairwise contact (an edge-level intervention) will fail: the ambient risk continually bypasses the local intervention via the topological hole. The explicit mapping is that harmonic risk commands structural intervention : the hospital administration must “fill the hole” by installing a filtration barrier (adding a 2-simplex to K) or severing the HVAC loop entirely (altering the global topology of the complex). This is the operational consequence of the identity dim ker (∆ 1) = β1(K(t)): the dimension of the harmonic risk space is a direct, computable readout of how many independent structural interventions are needed. 

# 6 Training Objective 

6.1 The Supervision Challenge 

A fundamental question for any vector-field health monitoring framework is: how do you supervise a vector-valued output when all available ground-truth labels are scalar (stress/baseline class labels, EMA scores)? GVF addresses this through a multi-task loss that combines scalar-supervised classification with geometric regularisation terms that enforce non-trivial structure on the learned flow field F. The geometric terms do not require vector ground truth: they are self-supervised objectives derived from the field’s differential structure. 12 6.2 Multi-Task Loss Function 

The total training objective is: 

L(θ, ω ) = Lcls (ˆ y, y )

| {z }

> scalar supervision

+ λ1 Lgeo (F)

| {z }

> geometric regularisation

+ λ2 Lorth (θ)

| {z }

> modality orthogonality

(10) 

Classification term Lcls is the standard multi-class cross-entropy loss applied directly to the linear read-out of the risk vector ri(t) via a head Wout ∈ RC×m (where C is the number of outcome classes). The risk vector ri is used directly (not its magnitude ∥ri∥): this allows the read-out head to exploit both magnitude and direction. For continuous regression targets, Lcls 

is replaced by mean-squared error on a scalar projection w⊤

> out

ri.

Geometric regularisation term Lgeo discourages degenerate flow fields that collapse to purely exact cochains (trivial HHD). It is defined as a negatively signed log-ratio :

Lgeo (F) = − log 



1 + ∥curl KF∥2

∥F∥2 + ε



(11) 

Lgeo ≤ 0 since the log argument is ≥ 1; minimising the total loss therefore rewards larger curl-to-field ratios. To prevent runaway incentives when dmax is large, ρ = ∥curl KF∥2/(∥F∥2+ε) is clipped to [0 , 1], bounding Lgeo ∈ [− log 2, 0]. Lgeo is an anti-collapse regulariser : it prevents degenerate exact-field solutions without interpreting curl magnitude as clinical severity; λ1 ∈ { 0.01 , 0.1, 0.5}

is selected by grid search (see Section B). 

Modality orthogonality term Lorth enforces that expert outputs remain in their respective bundle summands: 

Lorth = X

> n̸=m

π(n)(F (m) 

> θ

(x)) 2 (12) where π(n) projects onto the n-th summand. Combined with architectural enforcement (modality-blocked input matrices), this term closes the gap between the architectural intent and numerical precision during training. 

Vector direction and the identifiability challenge Even with Lcls , the direction of ri is not pinned by a scalar label—a rotation of ri leaving ∥ri∥ unchanged would not change the loss. GVF resolves this through two mechanisms: (1) Architectural modality separation : since each expert writes exclusively into its summand ε(n), the direction is determined by the relative expert activations, not a free rotational degree of freedom; (2) Geometric regularisation :

Lgeo further constrains the solution manifold by rewarding curl-inducing directions. The residual ambiguity—permutations within each summand ε(n)—is characterised formally in Section 7. 

# 7 Identifiability Guarantees 

Theorem 7.1 (Sufficient Conditions for Modality Identifiability) . Under the following strong 

sufficient conditions: 

(C1) Modality orthogonalization : the raw multimodal inputs are pre-conditioned via a block-orthogonal projection layer (e.g. a learned whitening transformation), ensuring that the transformed input subspaces {˜x(n) 

> i

} are linearly independent structurally guaranteed prior to expert routing. 

(C2) Expert specialisation : each F (n) 

> θ

has a non-trivial null space on x(m) for m̸ = n (enforced architecturally). 

13 (C3) Population coverage : the training dataset contains agents with zero-valued inputs for each proper subset of modalities (achieved via modality-dropout at rate pdrop = 0 .2). the map θ 7 → (F (n) 

> θ

)n is injective up to within-summand permutation. Proof sketch. The argument draws on the identifiability framework of [ 39 ] (Theorem 1, iVAE), adapted to the bundle-structured MoE setting. We note that iVAE is formulated for generative 

models with latent variables and requires the conditional p(z | u) to belong to a conditionally factorial exponential family. GVF is a discriminative architecture, so the correspondence is structural rather than a direct application: the modality-present/absent indicator vector (generated by modality-dropout under (C3)) plays the role analogous to the auxiliary variable u,and the direct-sum architecture (C2) enforces the factorial conditioning structure by restricting each expert to its own input block. Under these structural conditions, the identifiability argument of [ 39 ] yields injectivity of θ 7 → (F (n) 

> θ

)n up to within-summand affine reparameterisation; the reduction from affine to permutation ambiguity is detailed in Section E. A fully rigorous proof in the discriminative setting—verifying that the exponential-family sufficient statistic condition of [ 39 ] Theorem 1 is satisfied by the MoE expert outputs under (C1)– (C3)—remains an open problem. The present result should therefore be read as a conditional guarantee : it holds to the extent that the structural analogy with iVAE is exact. 

Remark 7.2 (Enforcing Identifiability in Correlated Clinical Data) . Raw physiological and environmental streams are natively entangled; for instance, Heart Rate (HR) and Heart Rate Variability (HRV) exhibit strong collinearity. Relying purely on the data distribution to satisfy linear independence would trivially violate the identifiability requirements. The GVF framework resolves this by strictly separating the assumptions: (C2) and (C3) are enforced via the direct-sum bundle architecture and modality-dropout during training, respectively. To rigorously satisfy (C1), we assume the integration of a block-orthogonalization module—such as zero-phase component analysis (ZCA) or a learned whitening layer—at the input of the MoE. This architectural constraint transforms (C1) from a fragile distributional assumption into a hard mathematical guarantee, enabling the application of nonlinear ICA identifiability results [ 39 ]even to highly correlated multimodal health data. 

7.1 Robustness Analysis of Identifiability Guarantees 

Theorem 7.1 relies on the hard condition (C1) of block-orthogonalization. In practice, perfect whitening of high-dimensional, noisy health streams is numerically challenging, and the estimated covariance of the transformed subspaces ˜ x may exhibit a residual non-diagonal component: Σres = E ˜X ˜X⊤ − I̸ = 0 . (13) We analyse the degradation of identifiability when (C1) is partially violated. Drawing on robustness bounds for nonlinear ICA [ 39 ], if the residual cross-correlation between modality subspaces is bounded by ∥Σres ∥F ≤ δ for some small δ > 0, the exact identifiability up to within-summand permutation is relaxed to δ-identifiability .

Proposition 7.3 (δ-Identifiability under Imperfect Whitening) . Under conditions (C2) and 

(C3) of Theorem 7.1, and under imperfect whitening with ∥Σres ∥F ≤ δ, the learned experts ˆFθ

deviate from the true disjoint modality generators F ∗ by: 

ˆF (n) 

> θ

− F ∗(n) 

> L2

= O(δ) ∀ n. (14) 

Proof sketch. Under exact whitening ( δ = 0), Theorem 7.1 gives exact identifiability. When 

∥Σres ∥F = δ > 0, the block-orthogonal input to each expert F (n) 

> θ

is perturbed by an additive cross-modality leakage term: denoting the true whitened input by ˜x(n) and the imperfectly whitened 14 input by ˆx(n), we have ∥ˆx(n) − ˜x(n)∥ ≤ ∥ Σres ∥2 ∥x∥ ≤ δ ∥x∥. For a fixed expert F (n) 

> θ

(i.e., holding the trained parameters constant), spectral normalisation ensures Ln-Lipschitz continuity with 

Ln ≤ Q

> ℓ

∥W (n) 

> ℓ

∥2 ≤ 1, so the pointwise forward-pass perturbation satisfies ∥F (n) 

> θ

( ˆx)−F (n) 

> θ

( ˜x)∥ ≤ 

Ln δ ∥x∥. The L2 bound follows by integrating over the training distribution p(x) (non-degenerate by (C3)): ∥F (n) 

> θ

◦ ˆW − F (n) 

> θ

◦ ˜W ∥L2 ≤ Ln δ (E[∥x∥2]) 1/2 = O(δ). 

Caveats. This bound applies to the forward-pass output of a fixed expert under input perturbation. The full claim—that experts trained under imperfect whitening converge to solutions O(δ)-close to those trained under perfect whitening—additionally requires algorithmic stability of the training procedure (e.g., uniform stability of SGD), which we assume but do not prove. Furthermore, the MoE gating weights g(n) 

> ϕ

(x) are also perturbed by the whitening error; under Lipschitz gating (ensured by bounded softmax temperature), this introduces a multiplicative O(δ) correction to each expert’s contribution that does not change the overall order of the bound. This graceful degradation property ensures that slight correlations leaking through the whitening layer do not catastrophically blend the physiological and environmental bundles, but merely introduce bounded crosstalk proportional to the empirical whitening error δ. In practice, 

δ can be monitored at deployment time as ∥ ˆΣres ∥F on a held-out calibration set, providing an operational certificate of identifiability quality. 

# 8 Theoretical Guarantees 

8.1 Universal Approximation 

Theorem 8.1 (Universal Approximation of GVF) . For any continuous target section r∗ ∈

Γ( ε(K)) and any ε > 0, there exist parameters θ such that sup i∥Fθ(K, xi) − r∗ 

> i

∥ < ε , provided each expert F (n) 

> θ

is a simplicial message-passing network satisfying the conditions of [36, 26]. Proof sketch. Each expert is dense in the space of continuous sections over ε(n) [36 ]; the direct-sum isometry of ε(K) preserves this density coordinate-wise. Standard GNNs on the 1-skeleton cannot be substituted: they force curl K ≡ 0 (Theorem 3.2), destroying cyclic risk detection and invalidating the theorem’s topological premises. Full proof in Section D. 

Remark 8.2 (Gap between UAT assumptions and proposed experts) . Theorem 8.1 requires each expert to be a full simplicial message-passing network operating on k-simplices for k ≥ 2. The practical expert architectures proposed in Table 1 operate primarily on the 1-skeleton and are therefore not covered by the theorem as stated. The UAT establishes that the GVF 

architecture class is sufficiently expressive; whether the specific instantiations in Table 1 inherit this expressiveness is an empirical question contingent on upgrading them to full simplicial architectures [ 36 ], as noted in Section 10 (“Expert architecture alignment”). Until this upgrade is implemented, the UAT should be read as a guarantee on the framework’s capacity ceiling, not on the proposed expert configurations. 

8.2 Distributional Stability 

Remark 8.3 (Stability and shift detection) . Under spectral normalisation of all GNN aggregation matrices ( Fθ L-Lipschitz in graph structure), the GVF output is bounded under Gromov-Hausdorff perturbation of the simplicial complex (derivation outline in Section F). This result is a consistency guarantee under idealised assumptions , not a tight empirical certificate, and should not be treated as a central claim. Its primary practical value is motivating the spectral shift proxy dspec (K, K′) = ∥λ(K) −

λ(K′)∥ (sorted Hodge Laplacian eigenvalues) as a computable operational signal: a small dspec 

triggers local fine-tuning of the MoE gating; a large one triggers full retraining. 15 9 Architectural Positioning and Formal Comparison 

This section establishes the theoretical capabilities of GVF relative to existing frameworks through a structured architectural comparison. The analysis is not empirical: all capability claims are consequences of the mathematical construction developed in Sections 3 to 5. 

9.1 Capability Analysis Against Representative Baselines 

A central claim of GVF is that representing health risk as a structured vector field over a simplicial complex provides qualitatively different capabilities from scalar-output models—capabilities that are structural consequences of the architecture and not contingent on empirical performance. We make this precise by comparing GVF against four representative baseline classes—Scalar Dynamic GNN, Vector MoE without bundle structure, clinical scores (SOFA, NEWS), and Scalar LSTM/Transformer— across capability, complexity, interpretability, and theoretical limit dimensions (Table 4). Table 4: Extended comparison of GVF against representative baseline classes. ✓ = supported by construction; ◦ = partial or heuristic; × = not supported. Complexity: |V | nodes, |K 1| edges, 

|K 2| 2-simplices, m output dimension, d scalar hidden size. All comparisons are architectural, not empirical.                                                                                    

> Feature GVF (Proposed) Scalar Dynamic GNN Vector MoE (no bundle) Clinical Scores (SOFA, NEWS) Scalar LSTM/Transf. Time complexity O(|V|+|K 1|+|K 2|)O(|V|+|K 1|)O(|V|· m)O(|V|)O(|V|· d)
> Space complexity O(|K 2|· m)O(|K 1|· d)O(|V|· m)O(|V|)O(|V|· d)Vector-valued risk output ✓×✓××
> Gradient component ✓×◦××
> Curl component (cyclic risk) ✓××××
> Harmonic component (topology) ✓××××
> Modality attribution by construction ✓××××
> Modality identifiability guarantee ✓××××
> Higher-order interactions ✓†××××
> Distributional shift detection ✓◦×××
> Missing modality robustness ✓×◦××
> Interpretability Intrinsic geometric (HHD) Post-hoc (attention/saliency) Post-hoc feature attribution Linear weights (direct read-out) Post-hoc only
> Data requirements Higher-order simplices Pairwise graphs Tabular/multimodal arrays Tabular/static snapshots Tabular/sequential
> Theoretical limits Requires dmax clipping for stability Curl ≡0 (misses cyclic risk) No identifiability guarantee Fails on non-linear interactions No mechanistic decomposition
> †

2-simplices enter through the training loss Lgeo and the HHD, not through the expert forward pass; see Theorem 5.3. 

We now discuss each capability class, using the hospital shift worker scenario from Section 1 as a running example. 

Scalar output models (LSTM/Transformer [ 11 ]; scalar GNN [ 16 , 17 ]; scalar MoE [ 12 ]). 

These architectures map multimodal inputs to a single real-valued risk score. They can achieve strong predictive accuracy on binary or ordinal outcomes but collapse all mechanistic informa-tion into a single number. Given a risk score of 0.78, a clinician cannot determine whether it reflects directional propagation from social exposure, a self-sustaining physiological loop, or a network-structural effect—all three require fundamentally different interventions. Scalar models lack this distinction architecturally; any attempt to decompose the output post hoc (e.g. via gradient-based attribution or saliency methods) requires additional assumptions not encoded in the model and lacks the algebraic guarantees of HHD. 

Scalar GNN (dynamic) Dynamic GNNs such as EvolveGCN [ 16 ] or TGAT [ 17 ] improve on scalar models by incorporating network structure, but produce scalar node-level outputs and operate on pairwise graphs (1-skeleton). Without 2-simplices, the curl operator is identically zero by definition (Section 3.2), so cyclic risk dynamics are invisible. The spectral shift proxy dspec is structurally available to any GNN using graph Laplacians, but without a Lipschitz guarantee the bound (Theorem 8.3) does not apply; shift detection reduces to a heuristic. 16 Vector MoE without bundle structure A vector-output MoE [12] produces a vector but without the direct-sum constraint: expert outputs are mixed by unconstrained gating. This means: (a) no guarantee that modality n’s contribution is confined to any subspace—attribution is post hoc only; (b) no identifiability guarantee (Theorem 7.1 requires the architectural separation); (c) the output vector is not a section of a structured bundle, so gradient/curl/divergence operators are not defined on it. The HHD cannot be applied to an unconstrained vector output because the notion of “1-cochain on a simplicial complex” requires both the simplicial substrate and the antisymmetric edge-network Ψ ω.

GVF: what the structure provides GVF’s capabilities in the last column of Table 4 are not empirical claims; they are consequences of the architecture: 

• Gradient component : always defined because F ∈ C1(K; Rm) and ∇K, div K are defined on any simplicial complex. It identifies which agents are net risk sources and sinks, directly actionable as “reduce the source” interventions. 

• Curl component : non-trivial only when K(t) contains 2-simplices and F is non-exact. It identifies self-sustaining feedback loops that will not resolve without cycle-breaking intervention—a qualitatively different target from directional flow. 

• Harmonic component : its dimension equals β1(K(t)), the first Betti number—a topological invariant of the interaction network. Risk locked in the harmonic component cannot be reduced by any local intervention; it requires changing the network topology itself (e.g. shift scheduling, team restructuring). 

• Modality attribution : each expert writes exclusively into its summand ε(n), so the contribution of physiological vs. behavioural vs. environmental signals to the total risk vector is identifiable structurally, not post hoc. 

• Missing modality robustness : the direct-sum architecture degrades gracefully—if envi-ronmental sensors go offline, the remaining summands carry a valid, lower-dimensional risk representation without retraining. None of these properties are achievable by retrofitting a scalar model with a post-hoc explanation layer: they require the simplicial substrate, the 1-cochain flow field, and the bundle-structured output to be built into the architecture from the start. 

# 10 Discussion 

10.1 Summary of Contributions 

GVF makes one central contribution enabled by four architectural properties. 

Central contribution To the best of our knowledge, GVF is the first framework to apply Helmholtz–Hodge decomposition to a learned multimodal risk vector field for intrinsic clinical interpretability. The higher-order topology of the simplicial complex enters the learned repre-sentation indirectly—through the geometric regulariser Lgeo during training and the HHD at inference (Theorem 5.3)—rather than through the expert forward pass, which currently operates on the 1-skeleton. Despite this indirectness, the decomposition is not a post-hoc explanation method: it is a structural consequence of representing risk as a section of a vector bundle over a simplicial complex equipped with Discrete Exterior Calculus operators. This produces three mechanistically distinct, orthogonal components with separate intervention targets (gradient: directional propagation; curl: cyclic dynamics; harmonic: topology-locked persistence) and two derived scalar scores (DPS, CRI) that complement a scalar alarm with a two-dimensional 17 warning signal. Existing multimodal fusion frameworks do not provide this decomposition directly: recovering cyclic and harmonic components requires introducing edge-level flow objects and 2-simplices that are absent from standard graph or scalar architectures. 

Enabling architectural properties The central contribution is made possible by four properties of the GVF architecture: 1. Geometric fidelity : risk is represented as a vector field over a time-varying simplicial complex, equipping the output space with rigorous DEC differential structure (gradient, divergence, curl operators on K(t)). 2. Modality identifiability : the direct-sum bundle structure assigns each modality a dedicated fibre, ensuring modality-specific risk components are identifiable structurally rather than post-hoc attribution (Theorem 7.1). 3. Domain agnosticism : any combination of wearable, behavioural, environmental, or external data sources is accommodated by adding or removing bundle summands and their expert; the framework does not assume a fixed modality set. 4. Formal guarantees : universal approximation (Theorem 8.1), modality identifiability (Theorem 7.1), and a consistency bound under simplicial complex perturbation motivating the spectral shift proxy dspec (Theorem 8.3; full derivation in Section F). 

10.2 Implications for Practice 

The three HHD components map directly to three operationally distinct intervention strategies, summarised in Table 5. Practically, GVF produces a per-agent (DPS i, CRI i) pair at each time step, whose thresholds can be calibrated independently (e.g. alert on high DPS, escalate on concurrent high DPS and CRI). The spectral shift proxy dspec signals when the network topology warrants model recalibration. Table 5: HHD components and their operational intervention targets.                      

> Component Signal Interpretation Intervention
> Gradient ∇KφDPS i>0Net risk source; directional propagation Reduce source (ex-posure, shift pat-tern) Curl curl ∗KψCRI i>0Self-sustaining loop; persists if source removed Break cycle (sleep hygiene, pharma-cological) Harmonic hdim ker ∆ 1>0Topology-locked; local actions ineffective Restructure net-work (scheduling, zoning)

10.3 Limitations and Future Work 

Empirical validation. The primary direction for future work is evaluation of GVF on real-world multimodal wearable cohorts. A suitable validation study requires: (a) multimodal physiological signals (cardiac, motion, and at least one environmental channel); (b) a labelled outcome variable for classification supervision; (c) a proximity or interaction network that yields a non-trivial K(t)with 2-simplices and β1 > 0. Validation should span datasets with varying network topologies, modality configurations, and clinical outcomes before any claim of clinical utility. 18 Ablation on simplicial complex order. A controlled comparison of GVF on the 1-skeleton versus the full K(t) with 2-simplices is needed to empirically verify the contribution of higher-order interactions; real proximity network data is required for this ablation. 

Expert architecture alignment. The theoretical UAT (Theorem 8.1) is stated for sufficiently expressive simplicial networks, whereas the practical expert architectures in Table 1 operate primarily on the 1-skeleton. Upgrading experts to full simplicial architectures [ 36 ] is planned. 

Privacy and federated deployment. The federated architecture (local gradient computa-tion, differential privacy noise) is sketched but not implemented. Non-IID simplicial topologies across federated clients present open challenges for Hodge Laplacian aggregation. 

Causal interpretation. GVF learns correlational structure. Converting DPS and HHD outputs into causal effect estimates requires embedding the framework within a structural causal model—an important but non-trivial extension. 

# 11 Conclusion 

We have introduced the GVF framework, recasting multimodal health risk assessment as a vector field learning problem over a simplicial complex equipped with Discrete Exterior Calculus operators. By modelling risk as a directional, geometrically structured object rather than a scalar, GVF preserves propagation pathways, cyclic dynamics, and topology-locked persistence—each with a mechanistically distinct, operationally actionable interpretation. The core design principle is that interpretability should be intrinsic , not a post-hoc overlay. The Helmholtz–Hodge decomposition—applied to a learned risk flow field on the edges of the complex, not to the (trivially exact) gradient of the node-valued section—provides exactly this: three orthogonal components that map to three distinct clinical intervention strategies (directional source reduction, cycle breaking, structural network reconfiguration). This shift from scalar alarm to decomposed vector signal is the central contribution of GVF. The bundle-structured Mixture-of-Experts architecture enforces modality identifiability by design; formal guarantees of universal approximation and distributional stability establish theoretical soundness. The architectural comparison in Section 9 demonstrates that GVF’s capabilities are structural—not empirical—consequences of the architecture. Empirical evaluation on real-world cohorts constitutes the primary direction for future work. GVF provides a mathematically principled, domain-agnostic foundation for the next generation of mechanistically interpretable multimodal health monitoring systems. 

# Declaration of Competing Interests 

The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relation-ships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. 

# Funding 

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 

# Use of AI Assistance 

AI-assisted tools were used for language editing and literature organisation during manuscript preparation. No generative AI was used to produce results, figures, or mathematical proofs. 19 A Algorithmic Specifications 

Algorithm 1 Multimodal Simplicial Complex Construction for K(t)

Require: Raw streams S(t), window ∆ t, thresholds τprox , τ sync , τ dwell 

Ensure: Simplicial complex K(t) = ( K0, K1, K2) 

> 1:

K0 ← V A(t) ∪ V S ∪ V E (t) ∪ V X ▷ Initialise 0-simplices  

> 2:

K1 ← ∅ , K2 ← ∅ 

— Phase 1: 1-Skeleton Formation (Edges) —  

> 3:

for each pair of nodes ( u, v ) ∈ K 0 × K 0 do  

> 4:

if u, v ∈ V A and (dspatial (u, v ) < τ prox or DTW( u, v ) < τ sync ) then  

> 5:

K1 ← K 1 ∪ {u, v } 

> 6:

else if u ∈ V A, v ∈ V E and exposure time( u, v ) > τ dwell then  

> 7:

K1 ← K 1 ∪ {u, v } 

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

end for — Phase 2: Multimodal 2-Simplex Inclusion —  

> 10:

for each triad {u, v, w } with all three edges in K1 do  

> 11:

if |unique types( {u, v, w })| ≥ 2 then ▷ Require multimodality  

> 12:

K2 ← K 2 ∪ {u, v, w } 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

end for  

> 15:

return K(t) = ( K0, K1, K2)

# B Discrete Differential Operators and Training Details 

The signed incidence matrices of K(t) are B1 ∈ {− 1, 0, +1 }|V |×|K 1| (node-edge) and B2 ∈{− 1, 0, +1 }|K 1|×|K 2| (edge-face). The three discrete operators of Section 3.2 in explicit form: (∇Kr)ij = rj − ri, ∇K = B⊤ 

> 1

⊗ Im (15) (div KF)i = P 

> (i,j )

Fij − P 

> (j,i )

Fji , div K = B1 ⊗ Im (16) (curl KF)ijl = Fij + Fjl + Fli , curl K = B⊤ 

> 2

⊗ Im (17) Divergence is signed (positive = net outflow); curl norm is bounded ∥curl K∥C1→C2 ≤ √dmax 

where dmax is the maximum number of 2-simplices per edge. 

Lgeo clipping and λ1 selection. The ratio ρ = ∥curl KF∥2/(∥F∥2 + ε) is bounded above by 

dmax (not by 1 in general); explicit clipping to [0 , 1] ensures Lgeo ∈ [− log 2, 0]. In proximity graphs dmax ≤ 6, so clipping is rarely active. λ1 is selected by grid search over {0.01 , 0.1, 0.5}.

# C HHD Computation via Sparse Linear Solvers 

The HHD of the risk flow F ∈ C1(K; Rm) reduces to two sparse linear systems (solved indepen-dently for each of the m coordinate channels): 1. Solve ∆ 0φ = div KF for φ ∈ C0(K; Rm) (size |V | × | V |, symmetric positive semi-definite). Unique modulo a constant; computed via preconditioned conjugate gradient using the Moore-Penrose pseudoinverse restricted to ker(∆ 0)⊥.2. Solve ∆ 2ψ = curl KF for ψ ∈ C2(K; Rm) (size |K 2| × |K 2|, sparse). Same solver. 3. Harmonic residual: h = F − ∇ Kφ − curl ∗Kψ ∈ ker(∆ 1). 20 Note: the right-hand side in step (3) uses F (not ∇Kr), consistent with Theorem 5.4. For 

|V | ≤ 10 4 and |K 1| ≤ 5 × 10 4, both systems converge in < 50 conjugate gradient iterations. 

# D Full Proof: Universal Approximation (Theorem 8.1) 

Note on the two-object architecture. The GVF framework learns two distinct objects: (1) the node-level risk section ri(t) ∈ Rm, produced by the MoE operator Fθ and supervised via 

Lcls ; (2) the edge-level risk flow Fij (t) ∈ Rm, produced by the antisymmetric function Ψ ω and constrained via Lgeo . The UAT concerns (1); the non-triviality of the HHD concerns (2). These are distinct and complementary guarantees. We provide the full proof of the universal approximation theorem for the GVF operator on simplicial complexes. Let ε(K) = LNn=1 ε(n) be the modality-structured risk vector bundle over K(t), with each 

ε(n) a trivial bundle of fibre dimension mn. Let π(n) : Γ( ε(K)) → Γ( ε(n)) denote the canonical projection onto the n-th summand. 

Proof. Fix ε > 0 and a target section r∗ ∈ Γ( ε(K)). Write r∗ = L 

> n

r∗(n) with r∗(n) = π(n)(r∗). 

Step 1: approximation within each fibre. Each expert F (n) 

> θ

is a simplicial message-passing network (SMPN) with non-polynomial activations. By Theorem 3 of [ 36 ] (applied componentwise to each of the mn output coordinates), for each n there exist parameters θ(n)

such that sup 

> i

F (n) 

> θ(n)

(K, xi) − r∗(n) 

> i

< ε. 

Step 2: the bundle morphism does not reduce capacity. The GVF operator outputs in Γ( ε(K)) via the direct-sum map ι : L 

> n

Γ( ε(n)) → Γ( ε(K)), which is a linear isometric embedding. Since ι is an isometry, the approximation bound from Step 1 carries through: 

ι M 

> n

F (n) 

> θ(n)

(K, xi) − r∗ 

> i

=

X 

> n

F (n) 

> θ(n)

− r∗(n)

> i
> 2

1/2

< ε √N . 

Rescaling ε ← ε/ √N in Step 1 recovers the original ε bound. 

Step 3: MoE gating recovers the direct-sum output. Set gating weights g(n) 

> ϕ

≡ 1and g(m) 

> ϕ

≡ 0 for m̸ = n. These are achievable by the gating network gϕ (a softmax-normalised attention classifier, UAT from [ 38 ]). The MoE output with these weights equals ι(L 

> n

F (n) 

> θ(n)

), completing the proof. 

# E Full Proof: Modality Identifiability (Theorem 7.1) 

Proof. We adapt the iVAE identifiability framework [ 39 ] to the bundle-structured MoE setting. As noted in the proof sketch of Theorem 7.1, the correspondence with [ 39 ] Theorem 1 is structural: GVF is discriminative rather than generative, and the exponential-family condition on the conditional latent distribution is replaced by the architectural constraints (C1)–(C3). The argument below proceeds under the assumption that this structural analogy is sufficiently tight to preserve the identifiability conclusion. Define the effective parameter map Φ( θ) = ( F (1)  

> θ

, . . . , F (N ) 

> θ

); we show Φ is injective up to within-summand permutation. Condition (C1) separates the training-loss gradient by modality (the guaranteed linear independence of the orthogonalized input subspaces ensures ∇θ(n) L depends only on ˜x(n)). Condition (C2) provides the auxiliary-variable conditioning required by [ 39 ] Theorem 1: each expert F (n) 

> θ

outputs zero on all other modality blocks by architectural construction. Condition 21 (C3) ensures the non-degeneracy coverage required by the same theorem: modality-dropout guarantees training examples for every proper modality subset. Following the structure of [ 39 ] Theorem 1 in this setting, Φ is injective up to within-summand 

affine reparameterisation: for each n, there exists an invertible affine map A(n) such that ˆF (n) 

> θ

= A(n) ◦ F ∗(n). The key adaptation that reduces affine to permutation: (C2) enforces that each F (n) 

> θ

maps into a fixed subspace ε(n) with blocked input structure. The affine map 

A(n) must therefore preserve this subspace, constraining it to act within Rmn . Since the output coordinates within each summand are architecturally symmetric (no preferred basis is imposed by the network), the remaining ambiguity is precisely a permutation of the mn coordinates within ε(n), completing the proof. 

# F Full Derivation: Stability Bound (Theorem 8.3) 

Proof. The proof has two components: (a) Lipschitz continuity of Fθ with respect to graph structure; (b) the bridge between Gromov-Hausdorff distance and Hodge Laplacian spectral perturbation. 

(a) Lipschitz continuity. Spectral normalisation enforces ∥Wℓ∥2 ≤ 1 for all GNN ag-gregation matrices, so the Lipschitz constant satisfies L ≤ Q 

> ℓ

∥Wℓ∥2 by induction over layers. Standard matrix perturbation theory then gives ∥Fθ(K, x) − Fθ(K′, x)∥ ≤ L · ∥ ∆k(K) − ∆k(K′)∥F .

(b) GH-to-spectral bridge. The Hodge Laplacian eigenvalue perturbation bound ∥λk(K)−

λk(K′)∥∞ ≤ C · dGH (K, K′) is motivated by the continuous Laplacian stability results of [ 40 ](Theorem 6). In the discrete setting, the bound follows from Weyl’s inequality applied to the finite-dimensional Hodge Laplacians ∆ k(K) and ∆ k(K′): since both are symmetric, their eigenvalue differences are bounded by ∥∆k(K) − ∆k(K′)∥2, which in turn is controlled by the number of simplices that differ between K and K′. Composing with (a) gives ∥Fθ(K, x)−Fθ(K′, x)∥ ≤ L·C ·δ.

MoE fine-tuning. Under fine-tuning of top-k gated experts, Weyl’s inequality (see e.g. [ 20 ]) bounds the Lipschitz constant change by O(∥δθ ∥). 

# References 

[1] H. Xie, “Practice of wearable devices combined with deep learning algo-rithms in predicting athletic injury risk,” Intelligent Decision Technologies , 2025. DOI:10.1177/18724981251380391 [2] M. Li, “Real-time health warning model for college students’ sports supported by wear-able devices,” J. Comput. Methods Sci. Eng. , vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 4271–4281, 2025. DOI:10.1177/14727978251337919 [3] D. Fang and C. Chen, “Sports injury risk prediction based on temporal graph encoding and graph neural networks: A cross-sport transfer learning framework,” Sci. Rep. , vol. 15, art. 37656, 2025. DOI:10.1038/s41598-025-21613-2 [4] Y. Wang, I. Azimi, M. Feli, A. Rahmani, and P. Liljeberg, “Personalized graph attention network for multivariate time-series change analysis: A case study on long-term maternal monitoring,” in Proc. 38th ACM/SIGAPP Symp. Applied Computing , 2023, pp. 593–598. DOI:10.1145/3555776.3577675 [5] B. Biswas and S. Sarkar, “Predicting psychological resilience and mental health from multimodal wearable sensor data using graph neural networks,” Int. J. Appl. Resilience Sustain. , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 190–210, 2026. DOI:10.70593/deepsci.0201010 22 [6] Z. Qian, A. Alaa, A. Bellot, M. van der Schaar, and J. Rashbass, “Learning Dynamic and Personalized Comorbidity Networks from Event Data using Deep Diffusion Processes,” in 

Proc. 23rd Int. Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (AISTATS) , vol. 108, PMLR, 2020, pp. 3295–3305. URL: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/qian20a.html 

[7] P. Gajer and J. Ravel, “Adaptive Geometric Regression for High-Dimensional Structured Data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.03817, 2025. DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2511.03817 [8] X. Wang and C. C. Yang, “MoE-Health: A Mixture of Experts Framework for Robust Multimodal Healthcare Prediction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.21793, 2025. DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2508.21793. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.21793 

[9] W. K. Wang, R. Yang, C. Pang, K. Natarajan, N. Liu, D. McDuff, D. J. Slotwiner, F. Wang, M. B. A. McDermott, and X. Xu, “Beyond the Clinic: A Large-Scale Evaluation of Augmenting EHR with Wearable Data for Diverse Health Prediction,” arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2509.22920, 2025. DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2509.22920 [10] Y. Zhang, H. Zhou, L. Feng, Y. Hong, and S. Li, “Learning Longitudinal Health Rep-resentations from EHR and Wearable Data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.12227, 2026. DOI:10.48550/arXiv.2601.12227. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/2601.12227 

[11] S. Zhang, Y. Li, S. Zhang, F. Shahabi, S. Xia, Y. Deng, and N. Alshurafa, “Deep learning in human activity recognition with wearable sensors: A review on advances,” Sensors , vol. 22, no. 4, art. 1476, 2022. DOI:10.3390/s22041476 [12] R.A. Jacobs, M. I. Jordan, S. J. Nowlan, and G. E. Hinton, “Adaptive mixtures of local experts,” Neural Comput. , vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 79–87, 1991. [13] E. Choi, M. T. Bahadori, L. Song, W. F. Stewart, and J. Sun, “GRAM: Graph-based attention model for healthcare representation learning,” in Proc. KDD , 2017, pp. 787–795. DOI:10.1145/3097983.3098126 [14] S. I. Ktena, S. Parisot, E. Ferrante, M. Rajchl, M. Lee, B. Glocker, and D. Rueckert, “Distance metric learning using graph convolutional networks,” in Proc. MICCAI , 2018, pp. 397–405. [15] E. Mossel, J. Neeman, and A. Sly, “Stochastic block models and reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1202.1499, 2012. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/1202.1499 

[16] A. Pareja, G. Domeniconi, J. Chen, T. Ma, T. Suzumura, H. Kanezashi, T. Kaler, T. Schardl, and C. Leiserson, “EvolveGCN: Evolving graph convolutional networks for dynamic graphs,” in Proc. AAAI , vol. 34, 2020, pp. 5363–5370. [17] D. Xu, C. Ruan, E. Korpeoglu, S. Kumar, and K. Achan, “Inductive representation learning on temporal graphs,” in Proc. ICLR , 2020. arXiv:2002.07962. [18] Y. Li, R. Yu, C. Shahabi, and Y. Liu, “Diffusion convolutional recurrent neural network: Data-driven traffic forecasting,” in Proc. ICLR , 2018. arXiv:1707.01926. [19] A. N. Hirani, Discrete Exterior Calculus , Ph.D. thesis, California Institute of Technology, 2003. [20] L.-H. Lim, “Hodge Laplacians on graphs,” SIAM Rev. , vol. 62, no. 3, pp. 685–715, 2020. [21] X. Jiang, L.-H. Lim, Y. Yao, and Y. Ye, “Statistical ranking and combinatorial Hodge theory,” Math. Program. , vol. 127, no. 1, pp. 203–244, 2011. 23 [22] M. Desbrun, A. N. Hirani, M. Leok, and J. E. Marsden, “Discrete exterior calculus,” arXiv:math/0508341, 2005. [23] H. Bhatia, G. Norgard, V. Pascucci, and P.-T. Bremer, “The Helmholtz-Hodge decomposition—a survey,” IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph. , vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1386–1404, 2013. [24] Y. Tong, S. Lombeyda, A. N. Hirani, and M. Desbrun, “Discrete multiscale vector field decomposition,” ACM Trans. Graph. , vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 445–452, 2003. [25] M. T. Schaub, A. R. Benson, P. Horn, G. Lippner, and A. Jadbabaie, “Random walks on simplicial complexes and the normalized Hodge 1-Laplacian,” SIAM Rev. , vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 353–391, 2020. [26] C. Morris, M. Ritzert, M. Fey, W. L. Hamilton, J. E. Lenssen, G. Rattan, and M. Grohe, “Weisfeiler and Leman go neural: Higher-order graph neural networks,” in Proc. AAAI , 2019, pp. 4602–4609. [27] A. Hatcher, Algebraic Topology , Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 2002. [28] J. R. Munkres, Elements of Algebraic Topology , Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, CA, 1984. [29] F. R. K. Chung, Spectral Graph Theory , American Mathematical Society, Providence, RI, 1997. [30] G. Carlsson, “Topology and data,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. , vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 255–308, 2009. [31] R. Ghrist, “Barcodes: The persistent topology of data,” Bull. Amer. Math. Soc. , vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 61–75, 2008. [32] H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher, and A. Zomorodian, “Topological persistence and simplifica-tion,” Discrete Comput. Geom. , vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 511–533, 2002. [33] A. Zomorodian and G. Carlsson, “Computing persistent homology,” Discrete Comput. Geom. , vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 249–274, 2005. [34] H. Edelsbrunner and J. Harer, Computational Topology: An Introduction , American Mathe-matical Society, Providence, RI, 2010. [35] S. Barbarossa and S. Sardellitti, “Topological signal processing over simplicial complexes,” 

IEEE Trans. Signal Process. , vol. 68, pp. 2992–3007, 2020. [36] C. Bodnar, F. Frasca, Y. Wang, N. Otter, G. Montufar, P. Li` o, and M. Bronstein, “Weisfeiler and Leman go topological: Message passing simplicial networks,” in Proc. ICML , 2021, pp. 1026–1037. [37] K. Xu, W. Hu, J. Leskovec, and S. Jegelka, “How powerful are graph neural networks?,” in 

Proc. ICLR , 2019. [38] S. Yun, M. Jeong, R. Kim, J. Kang, and H. J. Kim, “Graph transformer networks,” in Proc. NeurIPS , vol. 32, 2019. [39] I. Khemakhem, D. Kingma, R. Monti, and A. Hyv¨ arinen, “Variational autoencoders and nonlinear ICA: A unifying framework,” in Proc. AISTATS , 2020, pp. 2207–2217. [40] F. M´ emoli, “Gromov-Hausdorff distances in Euclidean space,” in CVPR Workshops , 2011. 24 [41] J. Bamberger, F. Barbero, X. Dong, and M. Bronstein, “Bundle neural networks for message diffusion on graphs,” in Proc. ICLR , 2025. [42] C. Bodnar, F. Di Giovanni, B. Chamberlain, P. Li` o, and M. Bronstein, “Neural sheaf diffusion: A topological perspective on heterophily and oversmoothing in GNNs,” in Proc. NeurIPS , 2022. [43] E. Coda, N. F. Cotaina, P. Shearer, and S. Risi, “Fiber bundle morphisms as a framework for modeling many-to-many maps,” in ICLR 2022 Workshop on Geometrical and Topological Representation Learning , 2022. 25