Title: 2603.06936v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.06936v1

Published Time: Tue, 10 Mar 2026 00:18:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. 

Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. 

# Extracting and analyzing 3D histomorphometric 

# features related to perineural and lymphovascular 

# invasion in prostate cancer 

Sarah S.L. Chow, Rui Wang*, Robert B. Serafin*, Yujie Zhao*, Elena Baraznenok, Xavier Farré, Jennifer 

Salguero -Lopez, Gan Gao, Huai -Ching Hsieh, Lawrence D. True, Priti Lal, Anant Madabhushi, and 

Jonathan T.C. Liu 

Abstract — Diagnostic grading of prostate cancer (PCa) relies on 

the examination of 2D histology sections. However, the limited 

sampling of specimens afforded by 2D histopathology, and 

ambiguities when viewing 2D cross -sections, can lead to 

suboptimal treatment decisions. Recent studies h ave shown that 

3D histomorphometric analysis of glands and nuclei can improve 

PCa risk assessment compared to analogous 2D features. Here, we 

expand on these efforts by developing an analytical pipeline to 

extract 3D features related to perineural invasion (PNI) and 

lymphovascular invasion (LVI), which correlate with poor 

prognosis for a variety of cancers. A 3D segmentation model (nnU -

Net) was trained to segment nerves and vessels in 3D datasets of 

archived prostatectomy specimens that were optically clear ed, 

labeled with a fluorescent analog of H&E, and imaged with open -

top light -sheet (OTLS) microscopy. PNI - and LVI -related 

features, including metrics describing cancer -nerve and cancer -

vessel proximity, were then extracted based on the 3D nerve/vessel 

seg mentation masks in conjunction with 3D masks of cancer -

enriched regions. As a preliminary exploration of the prognostic 

value of these features, we trained a supervised machine learning 

classifier to predict 5-year biochemical recurrence (BCR) 

outcomes, fi nding that 3D PNI -related features are moderately 

prognostic and outperform 2D PNI -related features (AUC = 0.71 

vs. 0.52). Source code is available at 

https://github.com/sarahrahsl/SegCIA.git. 

Index Terms —Deep learning, computational pathology, 3D 

pathology segmentation, prostate cancer. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

ROSTATE cancer (PCa) is the most diagnosed cancer among 

men and remains the second leading cause of cancer -related 

Research reported in this publication was supported by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) under R01CA268207 (Liu and Madabhu shi); the Department of 

Defense (DoD) Prostate Cancer Research Program (PCRP) under W81XWH -18 -10358 (Liu and True) and W81XWH -20 -1-0851 (Madabhushi and Liu); 

the Pacific Northwest Prostate Cancer SPORE P50CA97186 (True), and the Canary Foundation. 

Sarah S.L Chow, Rui Wang, Yujie, Huai -Ching Hsieh, and Jonathan T.C. Liu are with the Department of Pathology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305 

USA, and with University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA. Jonathan T.C. Liu and Huai -Ching Hsieh are also with Bioengineering, Stanford University, 

Stanford, CA 94305 USA (e -mail: slschow@stanford.edu, rwang98@uw.edu, yujiez@stanford.edu, hchsieh@stanford.edu, jonliu@stanford.edu). 

Robert B. Serafin, Elena Baraznenok, were with University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 USA. Rob Serafin is now with Unive rsity of Chicago, Chicago, 

IL 60637 USA. Elena Baraznenok is now with the UCB -UCSF Joint Graduate Program in Bioengineering, Univer sity of California, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA ( e-

mail: Robert.b.serafin@gmail.com, ebaraznenok@berkeley.edu). 

Lawrence D. True, and Gan Gao are with University of Washington, Seattle, WA98195, USA ( e-mail: ltrue@uw.edu, gangao@uw.edu). 

Xavier Farre is with Public Health Agency of Catalonia, Lleida, Spain ( e-mail: xfarre@fullbrightmail.org). 

Jennifer S. Lopez and Anant Madabhushi are with Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering at Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory 

University, Atlanta, GA 30322 USA. Anant Madabhushi is also with the Atlanta VA Medical Center, Atlanta, GA 30033, USA (e -mail: 

Jennifer.salguero.lopez@emory.edu, anantm@emory.edu). 

Priti Lal is with the Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine in University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: 

pritilal@pennmedicine.upenn.edu). 

*Contributed equally 

deaths in men in the United States [1] . Currently, the gold 

standard for diagnosing and grading prostate cancer relies on 

the examination of hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) - stained 2D 

tissue sections (around 5 -μm thick) obtained from formalin -

fixed paraffin -embedded (FFPE) tissues. If prostate ca ncer is 

observed, then the aggressiveness of the cancer is determined 

based on the visual interpretation of the spatial architecture of 

the prostate glands according to the Gleason grading system 

[2] –[4] . One challenge with the current histology workflow is 

that it captures  ~1% of the total biopsy volume, which can 

misrepresent heterogeneous tissue structures [5], [6] . Moreover, 

interpreting complex 3D biological structures can be 

ambiguous and misleading when viewing 2D histology sections 

[7] –[9] . These limitations contribute to substantial inter -

observer variability among pathologists, particularly when 

grading low - to intermediate -grade cancers [10] –[12] . As a 

result, patients may be under -treated, risking metastasis and 

death [13] , or over -treated, leading to unnecessary side effects 

such as impotence and incontinence [14] .

Recent advances in high -throughput 3D microscopy, in 

conjunction with tissue -clearing and rapid fluorescence -

labeling techniques [15], [16] , have enabled the development of 

non -destructive 3D pathology. Slide -free 3D pathology offers 

several advantages over conventional 2D pathology, including: 

(1) comprehensive imaging of large clinical specimens, as 

opposed to the limited sampling achieved through standard thin 

tissue sections, and (2) volumetric visualization and 

unambiguous characterization of diagnostically important 3D 

structures. These advantages have been shown to improve 

diagnostic assessments by both human observers and Pcomputational algorithms [9], [17] –[19] . Amongst various 

techniques for 3D pathology [18], [20] –[22] , open -top light -

sheet (OTLS) microscopy [7], [8], [23] –[25] is able to generate 

high -quality 3D pathology datasets of large clinical specimens 

at spatial resolutions comparable to conventional H&E 

histology. Without the need for physical sectioning, large 

clinical specimens can be rapidly labelled with small -molec ule 

(quickly diffusing) fluorescent analogs of H&E, optically 

cleared with gentle and reversible protocols, and imaged intact 

and in toto [24], [25] .

A challenge with 3D pathology is the size of the data – a

single biopsy can generate on the order of 10 to 100 GB of high -

resolution 3D microscopy data (uncompressed). This 

necessitates the development of scalable methods for extracting 

meaningful features and insights. In recent years, a number of 

computational methods [18] have been developed to analyze 

3D pathology datasets. While end -to -end deep learning models 

have shown impressive performance for tasks such as risk 

classification, these fully automated methods often lack 

interpretability and require extensive validation before they can 

be clinically deployed. In contrast, there is great interest in 

designing interpretable classifiers based on intuitive hand -

crafted features derived from 3D structures/primitives. These 

explainable methods offer physical insights and can a id in both 

hypothesis generation and testing for biologists and 

pathologists. Recent studies on hand -crafted 3D glandular 

features [19] , including volume ratios, tortuosity, and curvature, 

and similar studies on shape -based nuclear features [17] , have 

shown superior performance for predicting patient outcomes 

compared to corresponding 2D features. 

In addition to glandular morphology, which is the basis for 

the Gleason grading system, and nuclear morphology, whose 

structural alterations can reflect underlying molecular changes 

within diseases, modes of tumor invasion such as perineural 

invasion (PNI) and lymphovascular invasion (LVI) are 

common indicators of aggressive disease. PNI and LVI are 

characterized by tumor cells infiltrating along nerves or 

entering blood and lymphatic vessels, respectively, providing 

routes for metastasis. The presence of P NI or LVI has been 

associated with poor prognosis in prostate cancer [26] –[28] and 

PNI especially can be used to guide treatment decisions for 

prostate cancer patients [29] .

Despite their clinical significance, screening for PNI and LVI 

is not a standardized component of histopathological evaluation 

of prostate cancers [30] . This may be because PNI and LVI are 

rare in thin histology sections, which makes it challenging to 

identify PNI / LVI in an objective, quantifiable, and 

reproducible manner. Although immunohistochemical staining 

for nerves or vessels can facilitate the i dentification of PNI or 

LVI, it requires additional time, reagents and labor, and 

therefore is not routinely implemented in clinical workflows. 

With the advent of 3D pathology, we hypothesize that a 

volumetric assessment of the interaction between cancer 

regions and neural or vascular structures would enable more 

accurate and reliable evaluation of PNI and LVI, offering 

diagnostic insights that are often missed in conventional 2D 

histology. The key contributions of this study are as follows: 

• We present a deep learning -based pipeline for nerve 

and vessel segmentation in 3D prostate pathology 

datasets (H&E -analog staining) using ground -truth 

immunofluorescence datasets for supervised training. 

• We extract novel interpretable features related to 

perineural invasion (PNI) and lymphovascular 

invasion (LVI) from the 3D segmentation masks of 

nerves, vessels, and cancer -enriched regions. 

• We provide a preliminary exploration of the 

prognostic value of our extracted features for the 

prediction of 5 -year biochemical recurrence (BCR) 

outcomes for low - to intermediate -risk prostate cancer 

patients. 

II. Related work 

A. Nerve and vessel segmentation in 2D H&E 

histopathology images 

Accurate segmentation of histological structures is essential 

for quantitative morphometric analysis, as such segmentations 

enable the extraction of biologically meaningful features that 

inform cancer risk assessment. However, segmenting nerves 

and small v essels from H&E pathology images is challenging 

because these structures are convoluted branching structures 

with unpredictable geometries. They are also often subtle and 

ambiguous in H&E images. For example, peripheral nerves 

may appear as pale, eosinophi lic fascicles with indistinct 

borders, while small vessels or capillaries may appear collapsed 

or tangentially sectioned. These morphological ambiguities 

contribute to low interobserver agreement in the identification 

of LVI [31] .

To accurately segment nerves and vessels in biological 

tissues, deep learning -based automated segmentation 

approaches have been developed. However, most existing 

algorithms only operate on thin 2D histology images [32] –[34] ,

or on 3D microscopy datasets of animal models in which 

vessels or neurons are labeled with genetic reporters or systemic 

agents [35] . As such, these methods do not generalize to thick, 

volumetric datasets labeled with H&E -analog stains. In this 

work, we introduce a direct 3D segmentation method for nerves 

and vessels in volumetric pathology datasets, enabling 

unprecedented large -scale analysis of PNI and LVI in 3D 

datasets of human tissues stained with a fluorescent analog of 

H&E. 

B. Deep -learning -based segmentation in 3D pathology 

datasets 

The segmentation of tissue structures in 3D pathology 

datasets is typically achieved through deep -learning (DL) –

based methods or traditional computer -vision (CV) approaches. 

DL -based segmentation requires large, manually annotated 

training datasets, which are time -consuming and labor -

intensive to produce, whereas CV methods often require 

structure -specific immunolabeling, which can be costly and 

slow due to the limited diffusion of antibodies through large 

tissue volumes. To address these limitations, Xie etal. developed image -translation -assisted segmentation in 3D 

(ITAS3D) [19] , in which H&E -analog input datasets are 

computationally converted into synthetic immunofluorescence 

outputs, which in turn facilitate 3D segmentation of the 

immunolabeled structures via CV methods. This annotation -

free segmentation approach leverages rap id and inexpensive 

small molecule staining (i.e. H&E -analog staining), 

circumventing the cost and time of performing 3D 

immunolabeling. However, ITAS3D involves a two -step 

procedure combining DL -based image translation and CV 

segmentation, the latter of wh ich still requires manual 

parameter tuning. In contrast, our method trains a direct 3D 

segmentation model using immunolabeling -derived images to 

form ground truth segmentation masks (for training), thus 

enabling a one -step segmentation of nerves and vessel s from 

H&E -analog datasets. 

C. Segmentation masks of cancer -enriched regions 

To analyze the spatial relationship between cancer content 

surrounding neural or vascular structures, the cancer -enriched 

regions must first be localized within the tissue. The SIGHT 

pipeline [36] —a deep -learning –based 3D image translation 

framework —provides a practical solution for this task. SIGHT 

uses the ITAS3D framework to synthetically label two 

cytokeratin markers that are differentially expressed in 

malignant versus benign prostate glands. These synthetic labels 

are then used to generate continuous -valued heatmaps that 

highlight cancer -enriched regions within the tissue. By 

applying a fixed threshold, these heatmaps are binarized to 

produce 3D segmentation masks of cancer -enriched regions a t

glandular resolution. By overlaying these cancer masks with 

nerve or vessel segmentation masks, we compute features that 

capture the spatial interaction between cancer -enriched tissue 

regions and adjacent neural or vascular structures, serving as a 

prox y for PNI and LVI. 

III. Materials and Methods 

In this study, we developed a computational pipeline to 

quantify three -dimensional (3D) features associated with 

perineural invasion (PNI) and lymphovascular invasion (LVI) 

from volumetric prostate pathology datasets. The pipeline 

involves training a 3D de ep -learning model (nnU -Net) to 

segment nerves and vessels from optically cleared prostate 

specimens labeled with a fluorescent analog of hematoxylin and 

eosin (H&E) and imaged using open -top light -sheet (OTLS) 

microscopy, thereby eliminating the need for additional 

immunolabeling once the segmentation model is trained ( Fig 

1). The resulting nerve - and vessel -segmentation masks are 

integrated with previously generated cancer -enriched region 

masks to extract 3D spatial features that characterize tumor –

nerve and tumor –vessel proximity/interactions. As a

preliminary investigation , we apply this pipeline to a cohort of 

120 prostate biopsies to evaluate the prognostic value of PNI -

and LVI -related 3D features. 

The following subsections describe each component of the 

workflow in detail, including tissue preparation (Section III -A), 

OTLS imaging (Section III -B), deep -learning –based 3D 

segmentation (Section III -C), segmentation evaluation (Section 

III -D), feature extraction (Section III -E), and feature evaluation 

(Section III -F). This integrated framework provides the 

foundation for fu ture studies investigating PNI, LVI, and 

related processes in large -scale 3D pathology datasets. 

A. Datasets and processing of archived tissue for training 

and validation 

For training, we collected archived formalin -fixed, paraffin -

embedded (FFPE) blocks from 15 radical prostatectomy (RP) 

specimens archived in an IRB -approved genitourinary 

biorepository at the University of Washington (Seattle, WA; 

Study 00004980). These sp ecimens were obtained from 

patients originally diagnosed with low - to intermediate -risk 

PCa (Gleason grade groups 1-3). Each FFPE block was 

sectioned into 100 -μm thick slices (tissue curls), and tri -labeled 

with a fluorescent analog of H&E plus an antibody of interest, 

according to a protocol adapted from the iDISCO method [15] 

and modified by Xie et al. [19] . Cytoplasmic staining was 

achieved with Alexa Fluor 488 NHS Ester (5 μg/mL), and 

nuclear staining with SYTO 85 (5 μM). Immunolabeling was 

performed using either a mouse anti -human PGP9.5 (ab8189, 

Abcam, USA) or anti -human CD31 (M082329 -2, Agilent, 

USA) pr imary antibody (1:100 dilution), followed by Alexa 

647 -conjugated secondary antibody (715 -605 -150, Jackson 

ImmunoResearch, USA) (1:100 dilution). After staining, the 

samples were dehydrated and optically cleared in ethyl 

cinnamate before imaging. 

For validation, archived FFPE prostatectomy specimens were 

used from 120 patients with known clinical outcomes from the 

University of Pennsylvania. A genitourinary pathologist (P.L.) 

reviewed each case to identify a region most representative of 

the tumor, from which one 3 -mm diameter punch biopsy 

(average thickness  ~ 0.5 -mm) was extracted per case. Each 

punch biopsy was labeled with a small -molecule fluorescent 

analog of H&E consisting of TO -PRO -3 Iodide (1:500 dilution) 

for nuclear staining and Alcoholic E osin Y (1:100 dilution) for 

cytoplasmic staining, according to a previously published 

protocol [24] . Stained tissues were then dehydrated and cleared 

in ethyl cinnamate for imaging. 

Radical prostatectomy specimens used in this study were 

archived in IRB -approved genitourinary biorepositories at the 

University of Washington and University of Pennsylvania. 

B. OTLS imaging and post processing 

Tri -labeled 100 -μm -thick tissue curls (training data) and 

H&E -analog -stained 3 -mm diameter prostate punches (clinical 

feasibility data) were imaged using a 4 th -generation hybrid 

open -top light -sheet (OTLS) microscope [7], [23] . For the tri -

labeled tissue curls, imaging was performed using three 

different excitation wavelengths (Cobolt Skyra, Hubner 

Photonics, Kasel, Germany): 488 nm for Alexa Fluor 488 NHS 

Ester, 561 nm for SYTO 85, and 638 nm for antibodies 

targeting PGP9.5 or CD31. For the prostate punch biopsies 

(clinical study data), excitation wavelengths of 561 nm and 638 

nm were used for eosin and TO -PRO3. The acquired 3D This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. 

> Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible.

Fig 1. Simplified workflow for training an nnU -Net segmentation model . (a) The deep -learning (nnU -Net) segmentation model is trained with 3D   

> pathology datasets of 100 -micron thick tissues tri -labeled with a fluorescent analog of H&E plus a targeted monoclonal antibody (mAb). The fluorescent mAb
> channel is used to generate a ground -truth 3D segmentation mask, which is the desired output of the nnU -Net model. (b) On ce trained, the nnU -Net model can
> generate 3D segmentation masks based on 3D pathology datasets of larger/thicker clinical specimens that are labeled with only H&E -analog fluorophores, which
> are inexpensive and can rapidly diffuse in thick 3D tissues (unli ke mAbs).

volumes were stitched and fused using the BigStitcher plugin 

for ImageJ [37] , followed by 2X down sampling in each 

dimension, resulting in a final sampling pitch of 0.527 μm/pixel 

in all three dimensions. The 3D volumes were then intensity -

normalized (laterally and in depth) using a previously published 

post -processing method [24] .

C. Segmentation pipeline 

1) nnU -Net model 

We employed the nnU -Net framework to train a 3D 

segmentation model that predicts binary masks of nerve and 

vessel structures directly from H&E -analog fluorescence 

images. nnU -Net is a self -configuring deep learning pipeline 

built upon the U -Net architectur e [38] and automatically adapts 

its preprocessing, network architecture, training, and post -

processing steps to the input dataset [39], [40] . The model 

utilizes a combination of Dice loss and cross -entropy loss 

during training. Optimization was performed using Stochastic 

Gradient Descent with Nesterov momentum, and a poly 

learning rate schedule was applied to stabilize training and 

avoid gradi ent explosion. 

2) Training data preparation and ground truth 

generation 

For model training, regions of interest (ROIs) were extracted 

from the tri -labeled prostate datasets. Each ROI had a size of 

512 × 512 × 50 voxels at a resolution of 0.527 μm/pixel. A nnU -

Net model was trained to predict the binary segmentation masks 

for n erves (PGP9.5 -labeled) and vessels (CD31 -labeled) using 

only the H&E -analog fluorescence channels as inputs 

(cytoplasmic and nuclear channels). As a preliminary study, we 

trained two models: a nerve segmentation model using 520 

ROIs (PGP9.5 -labeled), and a vessel segmentation model using 

504 ROIs (CD31 -labeled). 

The PGP9.5 and CD31 immunolabeling channels were used 

to generate 3D segmentation masks that served as ground -truth 

training data for nerves and vessels, respectively. The 

immunolabeling channels were processed with computer vision 

techniques to create a binary mask of the corresponding labeled 

structures. Due to differences in staining quality, distinct 

strategies were used to generate ground -truth segmentation 

masks for ne rves and vessels. The PGP9.5 channel showed 

strong and uniform staining, allowing fu lly automated 3D 

thresholding -based generation of ground truth nerve masks. In 

contrast, the CD31 staining was weaker and more discontinuous 

as it labels only the thin endothelial cell layer of the vessel wall 

without labeling the vessel lumens. To ensure accurate 

generation of ground truth vessel masks, we used a computer -

assisted manual segmentation strategy to create complete vessel 

masks. See below for details. 

To generate ground truth nerve masks, the PGP9.5 

immunolabeling channel (512 × 512 ×  ~50 voxels) was first 

processed by logarithmic intensity adjustment to ensure signal 

uniformity and was then smoothed using a 3D Gaussian filter. 

Otsu's thresholding was further applied to determine an 

adaptive threshold and produce a 3D binary mask. This m ask 

was refined through 3D morphological dilation using a

spherical structuring element (radius = 7 voxels), hole -filling 

along all three orthogonal planes to ensure structural continuity, 

and a 3D erosion operation (radius = 3 voxels) to ensure 

continuity and boundary smoothness. The resulting masks 

provided reproducible ground truth labels for training a nerve 

segmentation model ( Fig 1a). 

For ground truth vessel masks, we used Medical SAM2 [41] ,

a 3D extension of the Segment Anything Model, to facilitate the 

manual annotation of the CD31 immunolabeling 

channel. Annotators labelled only the central plane of each 

region of interest, and Medical SAM2 extrapolated a full 3D 

segmentation within each tissue volume based on context -

aware features across neighboring slices ( Fig 1b). The resulting 

masks were refined through a simple 3D binary closing 

operation using a spherical structuring element (radius = 3 

voxels). Fig 1. Generating segmentation masks of mAb channels for nnU -Net          

> training. (a) Automated 3D thresholding -based computer vision method for
> generating ground truth segmentation masks of nerves. (b) Computer -assisted
> (Medical SAM2) annotation method for generating ground truth 3D
> segmentation masks of vessels.

3) Clinical data preparation, inference, and volume 

assembly 

After imaging, 2X -downsampled 3D datasets of prostate 

punches are approximately 90 GB in size [24] , with 

approximate dimensions of 4500 x 4500 x 1000 voxels (XYZ). 

To enable inference on GPUs with limited memory, the 3D 

datasets are divided into 25 overlapping sub -volumes (each 

1024 × 1024 × 640 voxels, with 25% overlap in the XY 

dimension) and stored as .nii.gz files compatible with nnU -Net. 

The nuclei channel (TO -PRO3) and the Eosin channel serve as 

the two input channels for nnU -Net inference. After inference, 

output masks from each block are reassembled into a full -

specimen segmentation mask. In ove rlapping regions, a voxel 

is assigned with a positive label for nerves/vessels (i.e., 1) if it 

is positive in any of the overlapping masks. Conversely, a voxel 

is assigned a background label (i.e., 0), indicating no 

nerves/vessels, if all contributing pred ictions classify it as 

background: 

𝑀 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 ) = max ( 𝑀 𝑖 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 )) (1) 

where  𝑀 𝑖 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 ) denotes the predicted label at voxel (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 )

from the  𝑖 𝑡 ℎ overlapping block, and  𝑀 𝑓𝑖𝑛𝑎𝑙 (𝑥 , 𝑦 , 𝑧 ) is the 

resulting label in the final segmentation mask. 

4) Post -processing for nerve and vessel masks 

Following block -level inference of segmentation masks and 

stitching all blocks into a comprehensive whole -specimen 3D 

segmentation mask, post -processing steps were performed to 

refine the segmentation masks. First, the full 3D masks were 

cropped in the z -dimension to exclude non -tissue background 

and to retain only the tissue regions. To reduce computational 

time for downstream analysis while preserving a reasonable 

level of resolution, the 3D masks were down sampled by a 

factor of 4 in each dimension, res ulting in final volumes of 

approximately 1024 x 1024 x 160 voxels (XYZ) at a sampling 

pitch of 2.1 μm/pixel. The down -sampled masks were then 

processed by a series of 3D morphological operations, 

including dilation, hole -filling, and erosion (as described in 

Section III -C-2), which collectively served to close gaps in the 

masks and consolidate fragmented structures such as partially 

stained nerves or vessel lumens. An additional correction step 

was applied only to the vessel segmentation masks to remove 

fal se -positive small vessels, such as those located within 

misclassified glandular regions. This was accomplished by 

comparing the vessel masks with a pre -existing glandular 

epithelium mask [36] . After an instance segmentation, any 

vessel  𝑖𝑛𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒 𝑉  that had more than 10% of its volume 

overlapping with a gland region  𝐺  was discarded:   

> 𝑉 ∩𝐺
> 𝑉

> 0.1 (2) 

Lastly, to focus our analysis on biologically relevant 

structures, small, isolated components were filtered out based 

on size. Only nerves and vessels above certain diameter 

thresholds (130 μm for nerves and 50 μm for vessels) were 

retained. These threshol ds were determined based on published 

literature and empirical estimates for identifying clinically 

significant PNI and LVI [42] . To estimate the diameter of each 

segmented object, we applied principal component analysis 

(PCA) [43] to the voxels within each connected component in 

the 3D mask. Diameters of each isolated nerve/vessel fragment 

were calculated based on the minor axis perpendicular to the 

object’s primary (major) axis. 

D. Comparing segmentation results with annotation 

ground truths 

To evaluate model performance, we selected 25 2D regions 

(2048 × 2048 pixels; 0.527 μm/pixel) from 7 prostate punch 

biopsies. Each region contained one or more nerve or vessel 

structures. A board -certified genitourinary pathologist 

manually annotated these structures based on false -colored 

H&E -analog fluorescence images, which closely resemble 

conventional H&E histology [44] . Annotations were performed 

using QuPath [45] and were exported as binary masks. Model 

predictions were then compared to these annotations to 

compute a Dice coefficient (F1 score), a standard metric for 

segmentation accuracy. 

E. Feature extraction and cancer region masks 

To characterize the features related to perineural invasion 

(PNI) and lymphovascular invasion (LVI), we performed 

quantitative spatial analysis of the proximity between cancer -

enriched tissue regions and the segmented nerves or vessels. 

Cancer -enriched reg ions were defined using a recently 

developed pipeline, Synthetic Immunolabeling for Generative 

Heatmaps of Tumor (SIGHT) [36] . To extract PNI - and LVI -

related features from these cancer masks and nerve/vessel 

segmentation masks, we developed two analysis strategies: (1) 

a 2D level -by -level analysis, designed to approximate 

conventional examination of histology slides, and (2) a 3D 

chunk -by -chunk analysis. Feature extraction was implemented 

in Python using NumPy , SciPy , and scikit -image .

1) Level -by -level analys is 

Since the clinical diagnosis of PNI and LVI is based on 2D 

histology slides, features were first computed on a per -slice 

(2D) basis across all depth levels of the 3D pathology datasets. 

These features attempt to mirror conventional pathological 

definitions of PNI and LVI. For instance, PNI is classically 

defined by cancer surrounding at least 30% of the 

circumference of a nerve on a given 2D slide [26] .

Level -by -level analysis starts with instance segmentation for 

each level along the z -axis of the stitched and post -processed 

nerve/vessel mask ( Fig 2a). For each nerve or vessel instance  𝑖 ,we defined two annular zones: (1) an adjacent region  𝐴 𝑖  ,

extending  ~32 μm from the boundary of the nerve/vessel (15 

pixels), and (2) a distant region  𝐵 𝑖  , extending an additional 

~32 μm from the first zone (15 to 30 pixels from the structure) 

as illustrated in  Fig 2b. These dimensions ( ~32 μm) were 

optimized via computational ablation experiments (varying the 

dimension from 10 to 40 pixels, 21 to 84 μm). Within adjacent 

region  𝐴 𝑖  and distant region  𝐵 𝑖  of each nerve/vessel instance 

𝑖 , we quantified the cancer burden as the percentage of each 

region that overlaps with the binary cancer mask  𝐶 :

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝐴 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴 𝑖  (3) 

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝐵 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵 𝑖  (4) 

From these, we derived the invasion score and gradient score 

for each nerve/vessel instance  𝑖 :

𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (𝐴 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴 𝑖 

(𝐵 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵 𝑖 

(5) 

𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (𝐵 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵 𝑖 

(𝐴 𝑖 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴 𝑖 

(6) 

A higher invasion score indicates that the cancer burden is 

greater near the nerve/vessel instance compared to that in the 

distant region. For each sample, summary statistics (mean, 

median, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation) were 

aggregated across a ll instances  𝑖  in each sample.       

> Fig 2.Visualization of level -by -level annular analysis to extract PNI/LVI -
> related features. (a) Stitched and post -processed segmentation masks are
> labelled with nerve/vessel instances. (b) Example of a nerve/vessel instance,
> adjacent annular region, distant annular region ,and cancer mask. The annular
> thicknesses are t. The intersection between these regions is used to calculate
> features that are related to PNI/LVI.

2) Chunk -by -chunk analysis 

While the level -by -level analysis mirrors how PNI and LVI 

are conventionally assessed in 2D histology, it does not capture 

the nerve/vessel -to -cancer spatial relationships in 3D. In 3D, 

nerves and vessels form a continuous interconnected network, 

and PNI/L VI can be seen in arbitrary directions. We thus 

developed a chunk -by -chunk analysis to quantify PNI/LVI -

related features in 3D. 

In this approach, the down -sampled segmentation mask was 

separated into overlapping 3D chunks of size 204 × 204 × 160 

pixels ( ~ 428 x 428 x 336 μm). Chunks were extracted with a 

stride of half the chunk size (128 x 128 x 160 pixels), sliding 

across the tissue volume. The chunk size was optimized via 

computational ablation experiments (varying the dimension 

from 64 to 256 pixels,  ~0.13 to 0.54 mm). Within each 3D 

chunk, we performed an analogous analysis to that described in 

Section III -E involving two regions: (1) an adjacent shell region 

𝐴  : extending 42 μm from the boundary of the nerve/vessel 

(~20 pixels), and (2) a distant shell region  𝐵  , extending an 

additional 42 μm from the first zone ( ~20 to 40 pixels from the 

structure). Unlike the instance -based 2D analysis, these shell 

regions were defined globally within each chunk and could 

include multiple disconnected nerve or vessel regions. 

Similarly, we computed the cancer burden, and derived 

invasion and gradient scores using the same definitions as in 

Section III -E-1: 

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑎𝑑𝑗𝑎𝑐𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝐴 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴  (7) 

𝐶𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑟 𝑏𝑢𝑟𝑑𝑒𝑛 𝑖𝑛 𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑡 𝑟𝑒𝑔𝑖𝑜𝑛 = (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵  (8) 

𝐼𝑛𝑣𝑎𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (𝐴 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴 

(𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵 

(9) 

𝐺𝑟𝑎𝑑𝑖𝑒𝑛𝑡 𝑠𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑒 = (𝐵 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐵 

(𝐴 ∩ 𝐶 )/𝐴 

(10) 

To obtain sample -level features, we aggregated the chunk -

based features across the sample by calculating the mean, 

median, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation for each 

feature.      

> Fig 3.Visualization of chunk -by -chunk shell analysis to extract PNI/LVI -
> related features. (a) Stitched and post -processed segmentation masks are
> broken into chunks, with a stride of half the lateral dimension of the chunk size.
> (b) An example chunk is shown with a segmented nerve/vessel, an adjacent
> shell region, a distant shell region ,and a cancer mask. The intersection between
> these regions is used to calculate features that are related to PNI/LVI.

F. Feature evaluation 

To evaluate the extracted features, a LASSO -regularized 

logistic regression model was trained to perform binary 

classification of 5-year biochemical recurrence (BCR) 

outcomes. Patients who experienced BCR within 5 years post -

radical prostatectomy (RP) are denoted as the “BCR” group, 

and all other patients are denoted as “non -BCR.” BCR is 

defined as a rise in serum levels of prostate specific antigen 

(PSA) to 0.2 ng/mL at least 8 weeks after RP [46] .

Within each training split, features were first filtered using 

an unsupervised feature selection approach to remove near -zero 

variance features and highly correlated features. The optimal 

LASSO regularization parameter ( 𝐶 ) was selected via an inner 

10 -fold cross -validation loop, while model performance was 

evaluated using leave -one -out cross -validation (LOOCV) and 

quantified by the area under the receiver operating 

characteristic curve (AUC). All analyses were implemented in 

Python using SciPy and scikit -learn .

IV. Results 

Our results focus on validating the segmentation model for nerves and vessels, followed by clinical validation of PNI - and 

LVI -related features derived from both level -by -level and 

chunk -by -chunk methods. Across all experiments, LVI -related 

features were not significant predictors of clinical outcome as 

discussed in Section V. 

A. 3D nerve/vessel segmentation model performance 

As mentioned, a 3D nnU -Net segmentation model was 

trained to automatically identify nerves and vessels in 3D 

pathology datasets of tissues stained with a fluorescent analog 

of H&E. The trained models were then applied to the clinical 

validation cohort.  Fig 4a shows 3D renderings of predicted 3D 

segmentation masks for vessels and nerves. A false -colored 

H&E -mimicking image of a nerve or vessel (indicated by an 

arrow) is shown in the zoomed -in images shown in  Fig 4b.

Visual inspection confirms that both segmentation models 

successfully capture the morphology and distribution of nerve 

and vessel structures ( Fig 4c). For quantitative validation, the 

overlap between ground truth annotations from a GU 

pathologist vs. model predictions is highlighted in white, with 

false negatives shown in magenta (pathologist’s annotation 

positive, model negative) and false positives shown in cyan 

(pathologist’s annotation negative, model positive). 

Segmentation performance was evaluated by comparing 

predicted masks with ground truth annotations for 25 2D 

regions (2048 × 2048 pixels; 0.527 μm/pixel) from 7 prostate 

punch biopsies (see Section III -D). The mean Dice similarity 

coefficient was 0.81 ± 0.08 for nerves and 0.71 ± 0.09 for 

vessels. For a video showing 3D renderings of the segmentation 

masks, please refer to the Supporting Materials.                

> Fig 4.Segmentation of nerves and vessels in 3D pathology datasets of
> prostate cancer. The example images are from prostate cancer 3D pathology
> datasets showing 3D segmentations of vessels (first row) and nerves (second
> row). (a) 3D rendering of nerve/vessel segmentations in a 3 -mm punch biopsy.
> (b) False -colored H&E -analog images of a zoo med -in region containing a
> nerve/vessel (indicated by an arrow). (c) Comparison between nnU -Net -
> generated segmentation masks and pathologist’s ground -truth annotation.
> Agreement is shown in white, with false negatives shown in magenta
> (pathologist positive , model negative) and false positives shown in cyan (model
> positive, pathologist negative).

B. Clinical validation result: correlating extracted 

features to BCR outcome 

1) Evaluation of level -by -level PNI -related features 

We first validated PNI features derived from a level -by -level 

annular analysis (Section III -E). Segmentation was performed 

on 120 prostate specimens, of which 45 contained sufficient 

nerve structures for downstream feature extraction and 

biochemical recurr ence (BCR) outcome prediction. For each 

nerve instance, PNI -related features were computed across all 

2D tissue levels. To evaluate the effect of annulus size, the 

annular radius was systematically ablated from  ~20 μm to  ~80 

μm, with a radius of  ~30 μm yielding the most predictive 

features. 

Extracted features were used to train a logistic regression 

model with LASSO regularization and leave -one -out cross -

validation (LOOCV) (see Section III -F). As shown in Figure 

6a , level -by -level features achieved an AUC of 0.71 (95% CI: 

0.53 –0.86) for distinguishing between high -risk vs. low -risk 

patients based on their 5 -year BCR outcomes. To compare with 

standard clinical practice, where only three cross -sectional 

tissue levels (25 μm apart) are examined, we also developed 

risk -stratification models using features extracted from three 

depth levels (25 μm apart) within the 3D pathology datasets. 

Limiting our analysis to only three cross -sectional levels 

reduced the AUC to 0.52 (95% CI: 0.32 –0.71), indicating that 

aggregating features across all depth levels (enabled by 3D 

pathology) better captures the spatial relationship between 

nerves and cancer -enriched regions and thus improves 

predictive performance. 

2) Evaluation of chunk -by -chunk PNI -related features 

We next implemented the chunk -based shell analysis 

(Section III -E). This analysis was again restricted to the 45 

patients with sufficient nerve content. The prostate volumes 

were partitioned into overlapping 3D chunks of 204 × 204 × 

160 pixels ( ~0.4 × 0.4 × 0.33 mm), with a stride equal to half 

the chunk size (102 pixels). The shell radius was fixed at  ~40 

μm, close to the optimal parameter identified in the level -by -

level study. For each chunk, adjacent vs. distant cancer burden 

metrics were calculated, allowing for a calculation of invasion 

and gradient scores. 

Chunk -based features were used to train a LASSO -

regularized model and evaluated using LOOCV. As shown in 

Figure 6b , PNI -related features from the chunk -based analysis 

demonstrate only modest prognostic value (AUC = 0.61), 

which was lower than that achieved by the level -by -level 

approach. The reduced performance might reflect dilution of 

local invasion signals across m ultiple small nerve fragments, as 

well as inclusion of irrelevant regions within chunks, which 

may limit discriminative power. 

3) Comparison between PNI -related feature and 

glandular features 

Finally, we compared the predictive performance of PNI -

related features and 3D glandular features. Glandular features 

were extracted as previously described [36] , including measurements of glandular and luminal curvature, average 

distance to center of mass, and average 3D surface curvature, 

which have previously demonstrated prognostic value for 

prostate cancer. 

Logistic regression models with LASSO regularization and 

LOOCV were trained using different feature sets. Models 

trained on PNI -related features alone achieved an AUC of 0.71 

(95% CI: 0.53 –0.86), while models using glandular features 

alone achieved an AUC of 0.64 (95% CI: 0.53,0.75) ( Fig 5c).              

> Fig 5.Prognostic evaluation of PNI -related features in 3D pathology
> datasets. Machine classifiers were trained to predict 5 -year biochemical
> recurrence (BCR) outcomes based on PNI -related features from 45
> patients. Prognostic performance is shown for models based on features
> derived from: (a) level -by -level annular analysis, (b) c hunk -by -chunk shell
> analysis, and (c) glandular features compared with PNI -related features. PNI -
> related features are moderately prognostic (0.71 for level -by -level analysis and
> 0.61 by chunk -by -chunk analysis, n = 45). PNI -related features are superior to
> glandular features (AUC = 0.64, n = 45). (d) Performance improves when
> aggregating across all levels vs. only 3 levels.

V. Discussion 

In this work, we developed and validated a computational 

pipeline for extracting novel features to assess perineural 

invasion (PNI) and lymphovascular invasion (LVI) in 3D 

pathology datasets. These datasets were generated from 

prostate tissue punch biopsie s imaged at sub -micron resolution 

using open -top light -sheet (OTLS) microscopy, enabling 

volumetric reconstructions of glandular, neural, and vascular 

structures. By leveraging our tri -labeling protocol, in which 

tissues were stained with a fluorescent ana log of H&E as well 

as an antibody that targets either nerves (PGP9.5) or vessels 

(CD31), we trained a nnU -Net deep learning model to generate 

3D segmentation masks of nerves and vessels in prostate 

tissues. We then implemented 2D level -by -level annular 

ana lyses and 3D shell -based chunk analyses to capture 

histomorphological insights into how cancer -enriched regions 

interact with nerves and vessels in prostate tissue. Together, 

these techniques mimic conventional pathological definitions 

of PNI and LVI for 2 D histology, while also extending the 

analysis into three dimensions through chunk -based shell 

analysis. In summary, we have developed new methods to 

quantify spatial patterns of tumor –nerve and tumor –vessel 

interactions in large -scale 3D pathology dataset s. 

Preliminary clinical -feasibility studies reveal that novel PNI -

related features provide moderate predictive performance. 

Limitations is predictive performance can be attributed to 

several factors. First, the size of the clinical cohort available for 

analys is was relatively small (n=45) and skewed toward lower -

grade patients (mostly Gleason grade groups 1 and 2). Second, 

although PNI has long been reported to correlate with adverse 

clinical outcomes, its mechanism and prognostic value remain 

complex. Not all patients with aggressive disease exhibit PNI 

and prostate cancer can progress and disseminate through 

multiple biological pathways. Despite these limitations, the 

PNI -related features demonstrated predictive performance 

comparable to that of established g land -derived morphometric 

features. Further studies with larger and more diverse cohorts 

are needed to determine whether PNI -related features can 

synergize with additional histomorphometric and 

microenvironmental features to support comprehensive and 

robus t predictive models. 

The cancer masks generated by the SIGHT pipeline provide 

gland -level resolution but are coarse compared with the 

cellular -level precision required to directly observe individual 

tumor cells infiltrating along nerves or vessels. Consequently, 

extracted feat ures may not fully capture the fine -scale 

mechanics of PNI and LVI. In addition, SIGHT was not trained 

to detect tumor cells within lymphovascular lumen spaces (true 

instances of LVI). Finally, LVI is a relatively rare event in 

prostate cancer and is less consistently observed than PNI in 

clinical practice (for prostate cancer). Therefore, it is 

unsurprising that the LVI -related features in this study are not 

as prognostic as PNI -related features for prostate cancer. 

From a technical perspective, implementing this framework 

required careful consideration of the scale and complexity of 

the data. Whole prostate tissue blocks digitized at sub -micron 

resolution generate datasets of several hundred gigabytes, 

necessitating strategies such as downsampling for feature 

extraction and block -wise chunking for both segmentation 

inference and feature analysis. These design choices enabled 

the workflow to be executed within the constraints of GPU 

memory and computational resources. The choice to analyze 

local 3D chunks and local instances of nerves or vessels, rather 

than attempt full -volume feature extraction, also reflects the 

biological nature of the problem: PNI and LVI are relatively 

rare, localized events. Without localized ana lysis, any signal 

associated with these events would be diluted when aggregated 

across the entirety of a nerve or vessel network. 

In summary, our study provides the first end -to -end 

computational pipeline for quantifying PNI and LVI in 3D 

pathology datasets. This involved developing a method to 

generate 3D segmentation masks of nerves and vessels in 3D 

pathology datasets and then dev eloping new methods to extract 

novel features that capture both 2D and 3D spatial relationships between cancer -enriched regions and nerves/vessels. Finally, 

we provide proof -of -concept results showing that PNI - and 

LVI - related features extracted from 3D pathology datasets can 

potentially improve risk stratification and oncologic decisions. 

VI. REFERENCES 

[1] R. L. Siegel, A. N. Giaquinto, and A. Jemal, “Cancer statistics, 2024,” 

CA A Cancer J Clinicians , vol. 74, no. 1, pp. 12 –49, Jan. 2024. 

[2] J. I. Epstein, M. B. Amin, S. W. Fine, et al., “The 2019 Genitourinary 

Pathology Society (GUPS) White Paper on Contemporary Grading of 

Prostate Cancer,” Arch Pathol Lab Med , vol. 145, no. 4, pp. 461 –493, 

Apr. 2021. 

[3] J. I. Epstein, M. J. Zelefsky, D. D. Sjoberg, et al., “A Contemporary 

Prostate Cancer Grading System: A Validated Alternative to the 

Gleason Score,” Eur Urol , vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 428 –435, Mar. 2016. 

[4] D. F. Gleason, “Classification of prostatic carcinomas,” Cancer 

Chemother Rep , vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 125 –128, Mar. 1966. 

[5] G. Gao, R. Yan, A. H. Song, et al., “Deep -learning triage of 3D 

pathology datasets for comprehensive and efficient pathologist 

assessments,” bioRxiv , p. 2025.07.20.665804, Jan. 2025. 

[6] C. Koyuncu, A. Janowczyk, X. Farre, et al., “Visual Assessment of 2 -

Dimensional Levels Within 3 -Dimensional Pathology Data Sets of 

Prostate Needle Biopsies Reveals Substantial Spatial Heterogeneity,” 

Lab Invest , vol. 103, no. 12, p. 100265, Dec. 2023. 

[7] A. K. Glaser, N. P. Reder, Y. Chen, et al., “Light -sheet microscopy for 

slide -free non -destructive pathology of large clinical specimens,” Nat 

Biomed Eng , vol. 1, no. 7, p. 0084, June 2017. 

[8] J. T. Liu, S. S. Chow, R. Colling, et al., “Engineering the future of 3D 

pathology,” The Journal of Pathology CR , vol. 10, no. 1, p. e347, Jan. 

2024. 

[9] N. P. Reder, A. K. Glaser, E. F. McCarty, et al., “Open -Top Light -Sheet 

Microscopy Image Atlas of Prostate Core Needle Biopsies,” Archives 

of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine , vol. 143, no. 9, pp. 1069 –1075, 

Sept. 2019. 

[10] L. Egevad, A. S. Ahmad, F. Algaba, et al., “Standardization of Gleason 

grading among 337 European pathologists,” Histopathology , vol. 62, 

no. 2, pp. 247 –256, Jan. 2013. 

[11] C. J. Kane, S. E. Eggener, A. W. Shindel, et al., “Variability in 

Outcomes for Patients with Intermediate -risk Prostate Cancer (Gleason 

Score 7, International Society of Urological Pathology Gleason Group 

2-3) and Implications for Risk Stratification: A S ystematic Review,” 

Eur Urol Focus , vol. 3, no. 4 –5, pp. 487 –497, Oct. 2017. 

[12] T. A. Ozkan, A. T. Eruyar, O. O. Cebeci, et al., “Interobserver 

variability in Gleason histological grading of prostate cancer,” Scand J 

Urol , vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 420 –424, Dec. 2016. 

[13] M. C. Haffner, A. M. De Marzo, S. Yegnasubramanian, et al., 

“Diagnostic challenges of clonal heterogeneity in prostate cancer,” J

Clin Oncol , vol. 33, no. 7, pp. e38 -40, Mar. 2015. 

[14] A. U. Frey, J. Sønksen, and M. Fode, “Neglected side effects after 

radical prostatectomy: a systematic review,” J Sex Med , vol. 11, no. 2, 

pp. 374 –385, Feb. 2014. 

[15] N. Renier, Z. Wu, D. J. Simon, et al., “iDISCO: A Simple, Rapid 

Method to Immunolabel Large Tissue Samples for Volume Imaging,” 

Cell , vol. 159, no. 4, pp. 896 –910, Nov. 2014. 

[16] E. A. Susaki, K. Tainaka, D. Perrin, et al., “Advanced CUBIC protocols 

for whole -brain and whole -body clearing and imaging,” Nat Protoc ,

vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 1709 –1727, Nov. 2015. 

[17] R. Serafin, C. Koyuncu, W. Xie, et al., “Nondestructive 3D pathology 

with analysis of nuclear features for prostate cancer risk assessment,” 

The Journal of Pathology , vol. 260, no. 4, pp. 390 –401, Aug. 2023. 

[18] A. H. Song, M. Williams, D. F. K. Williamson, et al., “Analysis of 3D 

pathology samples using weakly supervised AI,” Cell , vol. 187, no. 10, 

pp. 2502 -2520.e17, May 2024. 

[19] W. Xie, N. P. Reder, C. Koyuncu, et al., “Prostate Cancer Risk 

Stratification via Nondestructive 3D Pathology with Deep Learning –

Assisted Gland Analysis,” Cancer Research , vol. 82, no. 2, pp. 334 –

345, Jan. 2022. 

[20] O. L. Katsamenis, M. Olding, J. A. Warner, et al., “X -ray Micro -

Computed Tomography for Nondestructive Three -Dimensional (3D) 

X-ray Histology,” Am J Pathol , vol. 189, no. 8, pp. 1608 –1620, Aug. 

2019. 

[21] A. L. Kiemen, A. M. Braxton, M. P. Grahn, et al., “CODA: quantitative 

3D reconstruction of large tissues at cellular resolution,” Nat Methods ,

vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1490 –1499, Nov. 2022. 

[22] J. Park, S. -J. Shin, G. Kim, et al., “Revealing 3D microanatomical 

structures of unlabeled thick cancer tissues using holotomography and 

virtual H&E staining,” Nat Commun , vol. 16, no. 1, p. 4781, May 2025. 

[23] L. A. Barner, A. K. Glaser, H. Huang, et al., “Multi -resolution open -top 

light -sheet microscopy to enable efficient 3D pathology workflows,” 

Biomed. Opt. Express , vol. 11, no. 11, p. 6605, Nov. 2020. 

[24] K. W. Bishop, L. A. Erion Barner, Q. Han, et al., “An end -to -end 

workflow for nondestructive 3D pathology,” Nat Protoc , vol. 19, no. 4, 

pp. 1122 –1148, Apr. 2024. 

[25] J. T. C. Liu, A. K. Glaser, K. Bera, et al., “Harnessing non -destructive 

3D pathology,” Nat Biomed Eng , vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 203 –218, Feb. 2021. 

[26] S. -H. Chen, B. -Y. Zhang, B. Zhou, et al., “Perineural invasion of 

cancer: a complex crosstalk between cells and molecules in the 

perineural niche,” Am J Cancer Res , vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1 –21, 2019. 

[27] L. Cheng, T. D. Jones, H. Lin, et al., “Lymphovascular invasion is an 

independent prognostic factor in prostatic adenocarcinoma,” J Urol ,

vol. 174, no. 6, pp. 2181 –2185, Dec. 2005. 

[28] P. Zareba, R. Flavin, M. Isikbay, et al., “Perineural Invasion and Risk 

of Lethal Prostate Cancer,” Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers & 

Prevention , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 719 –726, May 2017. 

[29] J. A. Cohn, P. P. Dangle, C. E. Wang, et al., “The prognostic 

significance of perineural invasion and race in men considering active 

surveillance,” BJU International , vol. 114, no. 1, pp. 75 –80, July 2014. 

[30] D. J. Grignon, “Prostate cancer reporting and staging: needle biopsy and 

radical prostatectomy specimens,” Modern Pathology , vol. 31, pp. 96 –

109, Jan. 2018. 

[31] E. I. Harris, D. N. Lewin, H. L. Wang, et al., “Lymphovascular Invasion 

in Colorectal Cancer: An Interobserver Variability Study,” American 

Journal of Surgical Pathology , vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 1816 –1821, Dec. 

2008. 

[32] M. M. Fraz, S. A. Khurram, S. Graham, et al., “FABnet: feature 

attention -based network for simultaneous segmentation of microvessels 

and nerves in routine histology images of oral cancer,” Neural Comput 

& Applic , vol. 32, no. 14, pp. 9915 –9928, July 2020. 

[33] K. Kartasalo, P. Ström, P. Ruusuvuori, et al., “Detection of perineural 

invasion in prostate needle biopsies with deep neural networks,” 

Virchows Arch , vol. 481, no. 1, pp. 73 –82, July 2022. 

[34] M. Amgad, H. Elfandy, H. Hussein, et al., “Structured crowdsourcing 

enables convolutional segmentation of histology images,” 

Bioinformatics , vol. 35, no. 18, pp. 3461 –3467, Sept. 2019. 

[35] M. I. Todorov, J. C. Paetzold, O. Schoppe, et al., “Machine learning 

analysis of whole mouse brain vasculature,” Nat Methods , vol. 17, no. 

4, pp. 442 –449, Apr. 2020. 

[36] R. B. Serafin, J. S. Lopez, S. Chow, et al., “Detection of prostate cancer 

in 3D pathology datasets via generative immunolabeling,” bioRxiv , p. 

2025.08.11.669726, Jan. 2025. 

[37] D. Hörl, F. Rojas Rusak, F. Preusser, et al., “BigStitcher: reconstructing 

high -resolution image datasets of cleared and expanded samples,” Nat 

Methods , vol. 16, no. 9, pp. 870 –874, Sept. 2019. 

[38] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U -Net: Convolutional 

Networks for Biomedical Image Segmentation,” in Medical Image 

Computing and Computer -Assisted Intervention – MICCAI 2015 , vol. 

9351, N. Navab, J. Hornegger, W. M. Wells, et al., Eds. Cham: Springer 

International Publishing, 2015, pp. 234 –241. 

[39] F. Isensee, P. F. Jaeger, S. A. A. Kohl, et al., “nnU -Net: a self -

configuring method for deep learning -based biomedical image 

segmentation,” Nat Methods , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 203 –211, Feb. 2021. 

[40] R. Wang, S. S. L. Chow, R. B. Serafin, et al., “Direct three -dimensional 

segmentation of prostate glands with nnU -Net,” J. Biomed. Opt. , vol. 

29, no. 03, Mar. 2024. 

[41] J. Zhu, A. Hamdi, Y. Qi, et al., “Medical SAM 2: Segment medical 

images as video via Segment Anything Model 2.” arXiv, 04 -Dec -2024. 

[42] L. B. Schmitd, L. J. Beesley, N. Russo, et al., “Redefining Perineural 

Invasion: Integration of Biology With Clinical Outcome,” Neoplasia ,

vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 657 –667, July 2018. 

[43] A. Maćkiewicz and W. Ratajczak, “Principal components analysis 

(PCA),” Computers & Geosciences , vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 303 –342, Mar. 

1993. 

[44] R. Serafin, W. Xie, A. K. Glaser, et al., “FalseColor -Python: A rapid 

intensity -leveling and digital -staining package for fluorescence -based 

slide -free digital pathology,” PLoS ONE , vol. 15, no. 10, p. e0233198, 

Oct. 2020. [45] P. Bankhead, M. B. Loughrey, J. A. Fernández, et al., “QuPath: Open 

source software for digital pathology image analysis,” Sci Rep , vol. 7, 

no. 1, p. 16878, Dec. 2017. 

[46] S. Hawley, L. Fazli, J. K. McKenney, et al., “A model for the design 

and construction of a resource for the validation of prognostic prostate 

cancer biomarkers: the Canary Prostate Cancer Tissue Microarray,” 

Adv Anat Pathol , vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 39 –44, Jan. 2013.